                            EUROPEAN
                            COMMISSION




                                                    Brussels, 15.1.2024
                                                    COM(2024) 7 final




     REPORT FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND
                           THE COUNCIL

     on the first review of the functioning of the adequacy decisions adopted pursuant to
                               Article 25(6) of Directive 95/46/EC

                                    {SWD(2024) 3 final}




EN                                                                                          EN
1. THE FIRST REVIEW – BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT

The present report contains the findings of the Commission on the first review of the adequacy
decisions that were adopted on the basis of Article 25(6) of Directive 95/46/EC1 (Data
Protection Directive).

In these decisions, the Commission determined that eleven countries or territories ensure an
adequate level of protection for personal data transferred from the European Union (EU)2:
Andorra3, Argentina4, Canada (for commercial operators)5, Faroe Islands6, Guernsey7, Isle of
Man8, Israel9, Jersey10, New Zealand11, Switzerland12, and Uruguay13. As a result, data transfers
from the EU to these countries or territories can take place without additional requirements.

With the entry into application of Regulation (EU) 2016/67914 (GDPR) on 25 May 2018, the
adequacy decisions adopted under the Data Protection Directive remained in force 15. At the

1
   Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, OJ L 281,
23.11.1995, p. 31.
2
   Following its incorporation in the European Economic Area (EEA) Agreement, the GDPR also applies to
Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein. References to the EU in this report should be understood as also covering the
EEA States.
3
   Commission Decision 2010/625/EU of 19 October 2010 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the adequate protection of personal data in Andorra, OJ L 277, 21.10.2010, p.
27.
4
  Commission Decision 2003/490/EC of 30 June 2003 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council on the adequate protection of personal data in Argentina, OJ L 168, 5.7.2003, p. 19.
5
   Commission Decision 2002/2/EC of 20 December 2001 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the adequate protection of personal data provided by the Canadian Personal
Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act, OJ L 2, 4.1.2002, p. 13.
6
  Commission Decision 2010/146/EU of 5 March 2010 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council on the adequate protection provided by the Faeroese Act on processing of personal data, OJ L
58, 9.3.2010, p. 17.
7
   Commission Decision 2003/821/EC of 21 November 2003 on the adequate protection of personal data in
Guernsey, OJ L 308, 25.11.2003, p. 27.
8
  Commission Decision 2004/411/EC of 28 April 2004 on the adequate protection of personal data in the Isle of
Man, OJ L 151, 30.4.2004, p. 48.
9
   Commission Decision 2011/61/EU of 31 January 2011 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the adequate protection of personal data by the State of Israel with regard to
automated processing of personal data, OJ L 27, 1.2.2011, p. 39.
10
   Commission Decision 2008/393/EC of 8 May 2008 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council on the adequate protection of personal data in Jersey, OJ L 138, 28.5.2008, p. 21.
11
   Commission Implementing Decision 2013/65/EU of 19 December 2012 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the adequate protection of personal data by New Zealand, OJ L 28,
30.1.2013, p. 12.
12
   Commission Decision 2000/518/EC of 26 July 2000 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council on the adequate protection of personal data provided in Switzerland, OJ L 215, 25.08.2000, p.
1.
13
   Commission Implementing Decision 2012/484/EU of 21 August 2012 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the adequate protection of personal data by the Eastern Republic of
Uruguay with regard to automated processing of personal data, OJ L 227, 23.8.2012, p. 11.
14
   Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of
natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data and repealing
Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation), OJ L 119, 4.5.2016, p. 1.
15
   See Article 45(9) GDPR, which provides that decisions adopted by the Commission on the basis of Article 25(6)
of Directive 95/46/EC shall remain in force until amended, repealed or replaced by a Commission decision adopted
in accordance with paragraph 3 or 5 of Article 45.

                                                        1
same time, the GDPR has clarified that adequacy findings are ‘living instruments’, stipulating
that the Commission must, on an ongoing basis, monitor developments in third countries that
could affect the functioning of existing adequacy decisions16. In addition, Article 97 of the
GDPR requires the Commission to periodically review these decisions, every four years, in
order to determine whether the countries and territories that received an adequacy finding
continue to provide an adequate level of protection for personal data.

This first review of the adequacy decisions adopted under the former EU data protection
framework was initiated as part of a broader evaluation of the application and functioning of
the GDPR on which the Commission presented its findings in its “Communication on Data
protection as a pillar of citizens’ empowerment and the EU’s approach to the digital transition
– two years of application of the General Data Protection Regulation”17. However, the
conclusion of this aspect of the review was postponed in order the take into account the
judgment of the Court of Justice in the Schrems II case18, in which the Court provided important
clarifications on key elements of the adequacy standard, as well as other related developments.
In turn, this led to detailed exchanges with the countries and territories concerned on relevant
aspects of their legal framework, oversight mechanisms and enforcement system19. The present
report takes full account of all these developments, both in the EU and the third countries and
territories concerned.

Importantly, this first review takes place against the backdrop of the exponential development
of digital technologies. Over the past decades, the importance of adequacy decisions has
increased considerably as data flows have become an integral element of the digital
transformation of the society and the globalisation of the economy. The transfer of data across
borders has become part of the daily operations of European companies of all sizes, across all
sectors. More than ever before, respecting privacy is a condition for stable, secure, and
competitive commercial flows. In that context, adequacy decisions play an increasingly key
role, in many ways. By ensuring that protection travels with the data, they enable safe data
flows, respectful of individuals’ rights in line with the EU human-centred approach to the digital
transformation. By involving a recognition of a third countries’ privacy framework as
delivering a level of protection that is essentially equivalent to the EU one, they promote
convergence between privacy systems based on high standards of protection. Moreover, as
explained in this report, rather than being an ‘end point’, adequacy decisions have laid the
foundation for closer cooperation and further regulatory convergence between the EU and like-
minded partners. By enabling the free flow of personal data, these decisions have opened up

16
   Article 45(4) GDPR. See also Judgment of the Court of Justice of the EU of 6 October 2015 in Case C-362/14,
Maximillian Schrems v Data Protection Commissioner (Schrems I), ECLI:EU:C:2015:650, point 76.
17
     The Communication was published in June 2020 and is available at the following link:
https://ec.europa.eu/info/law/law-topic/data-protection/communication-two-years-application-general-data-
protection-regulation_en.
18
   Judgment of the Court of Justice of the EU of 16 July 2020 in Case C-311/18, Data Protection Commissioner v
Facebook Ireland Ltd. and Maximilian Schrems (Schrems II), ECLI:EU:C:2020:559.
19
   The adequacy decision concerning Japan was adopted on the basis of the GDPR and provides for a separate
periodic review. The first review was concluded in April 2023 with the Commission’s report to the European
Parliament and the Council on the first review of the functioning of the adequacy decision for Japan, COM(2023)
275         final,     available      at       the       following       link      https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=COM:2023:275:FIN.

                                                        2
commercial channels for EU operators, including by complementing and amplifying the
benefits of trade agreements, as well as eased cooperation with foreign partners in a broad range
of regulatory fields. By providing a straightforward and comprehensive solution for data
transfers without the need for the data exporter to provide further safeguards or obtain any
authorisation, they facilitate compliance, in particular by small and medium enterprises, with
the international transfer requirements of the GDPR. Finally, thanks to their ‘network effect’
adequacy decisions adopted by the European Commission are increasingly relevant also beyond
theEU, as they do not only allow for the free flow of data with the 30 economies of the EU, but
also with many more jurisdictions around the globe20 that recognise countries for which there
is an EU adequacy decision as ‘safe destinations’ under their own data protection rules.

For all these reasons, as also confirmed by the intense and fruitful dialogue with the third
countries/territories concerned underpinning this review, adequacy decisions have become a
strategic component of the overall relationship of the EU with these foreign partners and are
recognised as a major enabler for deepening cooperation in a broad range of areas. It is therefore
particularly important that these decisions can stand the test of time and address new
developments and challenges.

2. OBJECT AND METHODOLOGY OF THE REVIEW

The adequacy decisions that are subject to this review have been adopted under the EU data
protection framework that preceded the GDPR. While the most recent decisions date back about
a decade (e.g., the decisions on New Zealand and Uruguay, both adopted in 2012), others have
been in force for more than twenty years (e.g., Canada, adopted in 2001, and Switzerland,
adopted in 2000). Since then, the data protection frameworks in all eleven countries and
territories have evolved, for instance through legislative or regulatory reforms, developments
in the enforcement practice of data protection authorities or case law.

In carrying out its evaluation, the Commission has therefore focussed on developments in the
data protection frameworks of the relevant countries and territories that took place since the
adoption of the adequacy decision. It has assessed how these developments have further shaped
the data protection landscape of the relevant country or territory, and whether, considering these
developments, the various regimes continue to ensure an adequate level of protection.

To that end, the evolution of the EU’s own data protection regime, in particular with the entry
into application of the GDPR, was fully taken into account. In particular, since the adoption of
these adequacy decisions, the legal standard applicable to such decisions, as well as the
elements relevant for assessing whether a foreign system ensures an adequate level of
protection, have been further clarified through the case law of the Court of Justice and the
guidance adopted by the Article 29 Working Party and its successor, the European Data
Protection Board21 (EDPB).



20
  Such as e.g., Argentina, Colombia, Israel, Morocco, Switzerland and Uruguay.
21
  The European Data Protection Board gathers the Data Protection Supervisory Authorities in the Member States
and the European Data Protection Supervisor.

                                                     3
Notably, the Court of Justice in its ruling of 6 October 2015 in Schrems I established that, while
a third country cannot be required to ensure a level of protection that is identical to the one
guaranteed in the EU, the adequacy test must be understood as requiring an ‘essentially
equivalent’ level of protection22. In particular, the Court clarified the means to which the third
country in question has recourse for protecting personal data may differ from the ones employed
in the Union, as long as they prove, in practice, effective for ensuring an adequate level of
protection23. The adequacy test therefore requires a comprehensive assessment of the third
country’s system as a whole, including the substance of privacy protections, their effective
implementation and enforcement.

Moreover, the Court clarified that the Commission’s assessment should not be limited to the
general data protection framework of the third country but should also include the rules
governing access to personal data by public authorities, in particular for law enforcement and
national security purposes24. Using the Charter of Fundamental Rights as a benchmark, the
Court identified several requirements these rules should comply with to meet the ‘essential
equivalence’ standard. For example, legislation in this area should lay down clear and precise
rules governing the scope and application of a measure and imposing minimum safeguards, so
that the persons whose personal data is concerned have sufficient guarantees enabling their data
to be effectively protected against the risk of abuse and against any unlawful access and use of
that data25. It should also provide individuals with the possibility to pursue legal remedies in
order to have access to personal data relating to them, or to obtain the rectification or erasure
of such data26.

The GDPR has built upon the clarifications provided by the Court of Justice by setting out a
detailed catalogue of elements that the Commission must take into account in an adequacy
assessment27. Moreover, in its Schrems II ruling of 16 July 2020, the Court of Justice has further
elaborated on the standard of ‘essential equivalence’, in particular with respect to the rules on
access to personal data by public authorities for law enforcement and national security purposes.
In particular, it has clarified that the ‘essential equivalence’ standard requires that relevant legal
frameworks binding public authorities in the third countries and territories concerned include
minimum safeguards ensuring that such authorities cannot access data beyond what is necessary
and proportionate to pursue legitimate objectives, and data subjects enjoy effective and
enforceable rights against such authorities28.

The evolution of the adequacy standard is also reflected in the guidance that was originally
adopted by the Article 29 Working Party and then endorsed by the EDPB29. This guidance, and
in particular the so-called “adequacy referential”, further clarifies the elements the Commission

22
   Schrems I, points 73, 74 and 96. See also Recital 104 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, which refers to the standard
of essential equivalence.
23
   Schrems I, point 74.
24
   Schrems I, point 90.
25
   Schrems I, point 91.
26
   Schrems I, point 95.
27
   Article 45(2) GDPR.
28
   Schrems II, points 180-182.
29
       Adequacy      Referential,    WP       254     rev.    01,    6    February     2018     (available      at:
https://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/article29/item-detail.cfm?item_id=614108).

                                                        4
must take into account when carrying out an adequacy assessment, including by providing an
overview of ‘essential guarantees’ for access to personal data by public authorities. The latter
builds in particular on the case law of the European Court of Human Rights and was updated
by the EDPB to take into account the clarifications provided by the Court of Justice in the
Schrems II judgment30. Importantly, the adequacy referential also acknowledges that the
standard of ‘essential equivalence’ does not involve a point-to-point replication (‘photocopy’)
of EU rules, given that the means of ensuring a comparable level of protection may vary
between different privacy systems, often reflecting different legal traditions.

Therefore, to determine whether the eleven adequacy decisions adopted under the former rules
continue to meet the standard set by the GDPR, the Commission has not only taken into account
the evolution of the data protection frameworks in the countries and territories concerned, but
also the evolution in the interpretation under EU law of the adequacy standard itself. This also
includes an assessment of the legal framework governing the access to and use of personal data
transferred from the EU by public authorities of the countries or territories that were found to
provide an adequate level of protection on the basis of Article 25(6) of the Data Protection
Directive.

3. REVIEW PROCESS

As described above, for each of the countries or territories concerned, the evaluation of the
existing adequacy decisions covers the data protection framework and any developments with
respect to that legal framework since the adequacy finding was adopted, as well as the rules
governing government access to data – in particular, for law enforcement and national security
purposes. In the past years, the Commission services have taken several steps to conduct this
assessment, in close cooperation with each of the relevant countries or territories.

To assist the Commission with its monitoring obligations, each of the eleven countries or
territories provided the Commission with comprehensive information on developments in its
data protection regime since the adoption of the adequacy decision. In addition, from each of
the eleven countries or territories the Commission sought detailed information concerning the
rules on government access to personal data, in particular for law enforcement and national
security purposes that apply in the relevant country or territory. The Commission also sought
information from public sources, oversight and enforcement authorities as well from local
experts on the functioning of the decisions and on relevant developments in the law and practice
of each of the countries and territories concerned, both as regards the data protection rules
applicable to private operators and with respect to government access. Finally, where relevant,
due account has been taken of the international commitments subscribed by these
countries/territories under regional or universal instruments.

On that basis, the Commission has engaged in an intense dialogue with each of the countries
and territories concerned. In the context of this dialogue, many of said countries and territories


30
   Recommendations 02/2020 on the European Essential Guarantees for surveillance measures (available at:
https://edpb.europa.eu/our-work-tools/our-documents/recommendations/recommendations-022020-european-
essential-guarantees_en).

                                                   5
have modernised and strengthened their privacy legislation through comprehensive or partial
reforms (e.g., Andorra, Canada, Faroe Island, Switzerland, New Zealand), prompted amongst
other by the need to ensure the continuity of the adequacy decisions. Some of these countries
have adopted regulations and/or guidance by their data protection authority to introduce new
data protection requirements (e.g., Israel, Uruguay) or clarifying certain privacy rules (e.g.,
Argentina, Canada, Guernsey, Jersey, Isle of Man, Israel, New Zealand), building on
enforcement practice or case law. Moreover, in order to address relevant differences in the level
of protection, additional safeguards for personal data transferred from Europe have been – when
needed to ensure the continuity of the adequacy decision– negotiated and agreed with some of
the countries and territories concerned. For example, the Canadian government extended the
rights of access and correction with respect to personal data processed by the public sector to
all individuals, regardless of their nationality or place of residence (whereas these rights were
in the past only available to Canadian citizens, permanent residents or individuals present in
Canada)31. As another example, the Israeli government introduced specific safeguards to
reinforce the protection of personal data transferred from the European Economic Area which
notably create new obligations in the area of data accuracy and data retention, strengthen the
rights to information and deletion and introduce additional categories of sensitive data32.

In parallel, the Commission services gathered the views of and regularly informed the European
Parliament (committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs)33 the Council (through the
Data Protection Working Party)34, the EDPB35, and the GDPR Multi-Stakeholder Expert
Group36 (which includes representatives of civil society, industry, academia and legal
practitioners) on the progress of the evaluation.

This report and the accompanying Staff Working Document (SWD) are therefore the result of
close cooperation with each of the countries and territories concerned, as well as consultation
with and feedback from relevant EU institutions and bodies. They rely on a variety of sources,
including legislation, regulatory acts, case law, decisions and guidance from data protection
authorities, reports from (independent) oversight bodies and input from stakeholders. Prior to
the adoption of this report, all of the afforementioned countries and territories have been given
the opportunity to verify the factual accuracy of the information provided on their system in the
SWD.


31
   Section 12 of the Privacy Act, Privacy Act Extension Order, No. 1 and Privacy Act Extension Order, No. 2.
32
   Privacy Protection Regulations (Instructions for Data that was Transferred to Israel from the European Economic
Area), 5783-2023, published in the Israeli Official Gazette (Reshumut) on 7 May 2023.
33
   See, e.g., European Parliament resolution of 25 March 2021 on the Commission evaluation report on the
implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation two years after its application (2020/2717(RSP),
available at the following link: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/TA-9-2021-0111_EN.html.
34
   See, e.g., Council position and findings on the application of the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
adopted on 19 December 2019, available at the following link: https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-
14994-2019-REV-1/en/pdf.
35
   See e.g. contribution of the EDPB to the evaluation of the GDPR under Article 97, adopted on 18 February
2020,                   available                 at               the                 following                link:
https://edpb.europa.eu/sites/default/files/files/file1/edpb_contributiongdprevaluation_20200218.pdf.
36
   See, e.g., the report from the Multistakeholder Expert Group on the GDPR evaluation, available at the following
link:                                                               https://ec.europa.eu/transparency/expert-groups-
register/screen/meetings/consult?lang=en&do=groupDetail.groupMeeting&meetingId=21356.

                                                         6
4. MAIN FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS

The first review has demonstrated that since the adoption of the adequacy decisions, the data
protection frameworks in place in each of the eleven countries or territories have further
converged with the framework of the EU. Moreover, in the area of government access to
personal data, the first review has shown that the law of these countries or territories imposes
appropriate safeguards and limitations and provides oversight and redress mechanisms in this
area.

The detailed findings concerning each of the eleven countries or territories are presented in the
Commission SWD which accompanies the present report. Based on these findings, the
Commission concludes that each of the eleven countries and territories continues to ensure an
adequate level of protection for personal data transferred from the European Union within the
meaning of the GDPR, as interpreted by the Court of Justice. The findings for each of the
adequate countries and territories are summarised below.

     4.1.     Andorra

The Commission welcomes the developments in the Andorran legal framework since the
adoption of the adequacy decision, including legislative amendments and activities of
supervisory bodies. In particular, the adoption of Qualified Law 29/2021 on the protection of
personal data that entered into force in May 2022 has contributed to an increased level of data
protection, as the Law is closely aligned with the GDPR in its structure and main components.

In the area of government access to personal data, public authorities in Andorra are subject to
clear, precise and accessible rules under which such authorities can access and subsequently
use for public interest objectives, in particular for criminal law enforcement and national
security purposes, data transferred from the EU. These limitations and safeguards follow from
the overarching legal framework and international commitments, notably the Andorran
Constitution, the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and the Council of Europe
Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal
Data (Convention 108 and the amending Protocol, creating the modernised Convention 108+),
as well as from specific data protection rules applying to the processing of personal data in the
law enforcement context that essentially replicate the core elements of the Directive (EU)
2016/68037. In addition, Andorran law imposes a number of specific conditions and limitations
on the access to and use of personal data by public authorities, and it provides oversight and
redress mechanisms in this area.

Based on the overall findings set out in the SWD, the Commission concludes that Andorra
continues to provide an adequate level of protection for personal data transferred from the EU.




37
  Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of
natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of the
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, and
on the free movement of such data, and repealing Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA.

                                                         7
With respect to the specific data protection rules that currently apply to data processing by law
enforcement authorities, the Commission welcomes the Andorran legislator’s intention to
replace these rules with a more comprehensive regime that will be even further aligned with the
rules that apply in the EU. The Commission will closely monitor future developments in this
area.

    4.2.    Argentina

The Commission welcomes the developments in the Argentinian legal framework since the
adoption of the adequacy decision, including legislative amendments, case law and activities of
oversight bodies, which have contributed to an increased level of data protection. In particular,
the independence of the Argentinian data protection supervisory authority, was significantly
strengthened through Decree No. 746/17, which entrusted the Agencia de Acceso a la
Información Pública (AAIP) with the responsibility for overseeing compliance with the data
protection law. In addition, the AAIP issued a number of binding regulations and opinions
which clarify how the data protection framework is to be interpreted and applied in practice,
thus helping to keep the data protection law up to date. Argentina also strengthened its
international commitments in the field of data protection by joining the Council of Europe
Convention for the protection of individuals with regard to the automatic processing of personal
data and its additional Protocol in 2019, and by ratifying the amending Protocol creating the
modernised Convention 108+ in 2023.

In the area of government access to personal data, public authorities in Argentina are subject to
clear, precise and accessible rules under which such authorities can access and subsequently
use for public interest objectives, in particular for criminal law enforcement and national
security purposes, data transferred from the EU. These limitations and safeguards follow from
the overarching legal framework and international commitments, notably the Argentinian
Constitution, the American Convention on Human Rights, Convention 108 and Convention
108+, as well as from the Argentinian data protection rules (Law 25.326 on Personal Data
Protection of 4 October 2000) that are also applicable to the processing of personal data by
Argentinian public authorities, including for law enforcement and national security purposes.
In addition, Argentinian law imposes a number of specific conditions and limitations on the
access to and use of personal data for criminal law enforcement and national security purposes,
and it provides oversight and redress mechanisms in this area.

Based on the overall findings set out in the SWD, the Commission concludes that Argentina
continues to provide an adequate level of protection for personal data transferred from the EU.

At the same time, the Commission recommends enshrining the protections that have been
developed at sub-legislative level in legislation to enhance legal certainty and consolidate these
requirements. The draft Data Protection Bill that was recently introduced in the Argentinian
Congress could offer an opportunity to codify such developments, and thereby further
strengthen the Argentinian privacy framework. The Commission will closely monitor future
developments in this area.

   4.3.     Canada

                                                8
The Commission welcomes the developments in the Canadian legal framework since the
adoption of the adequacy decision, including several legislative amendments, case law and
activities of oversight bodies, which have contributed to an increased level of data protection.
In particular, the Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA) has
been further strengthened through different amendments (e.g., on the conditions for valid
consent and data breach notifications), while key data protection requirements (e.g., on the
processing of sensitive data) have been further clarified through case law as well as guidance
issued by the Canadian federal data protection authority, the Office of the Privacy
Commissioner. At the same time, the Commission recommends enshrining some of the
protections that have been developed at sub-legislative level in legislation to enhance legal
certainty and consolidate these requirements. The ongoing legislative reform of PIPEDA could
notably offer an opportunity to codify such developments, and thereby further strengthen the
Canadian privacy framework. The Commission will closely monitor future developments in
this area.

In the area of government access to personal data, public authorities in Canada are subject to
clear, precise and accessible rules under which such authorities can access and subsequently
use for public interest objectives, in particular for criminal law enforcement and national
security purposes, data transferred from the EU. These limitations and safeguards follow from
the overarching constitutional framework (the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms), case
law, specific legislation regulating access to data, as well as data protection rules (i.e., the
Privacy Act and similar laws at provincial level) that also apply to the processing of personal
data by Canadian public authorities, including for law enforcement and national security
purposes. In addition, the Canadian legal system provides effective oversight and redress
mechanisms in this area, including through a recent extension of data subject rights and redress
possibilities for non-Canadian nationals or residents.

Based on the overall findings set out in the SWD, the Commission concludes that Canada
continues to provide an adequate level of protection for personal data transferred from the EU
to recipients subject to PIPEDA. As noted above, PIPEDA is currently subject to a legislative
reform which could further strengthen privacy protections, including in areas that are relevant
for the adequacy finding.

  4.4.     Faroe Islands

The Commission welcomes the developments in the legal framework of the Faroe Islands since
the adoption of the adequacy decision, including legislative amendments, case law and activities
of oversight bodies, which have contributed to an increased level of data protection. In
particular, the Faroe Islands have significantly modernised their data protection framework by
adopting the Data Protection Act, which entered into force in 2021 and closely aligned the
Faroese regime with the GDPR.

In the area of government access to personal data, public authorities in the Faroe Islands are
subject to clear, precise and accessible rules under which such authorities can access and
subsequently use for public interest objectives, in particular for criminal law enforcement and
national security purposes, data transferred from the EU. These limitations and safeguards
                                               9
follow from the overarching legal framework and international commitments, notably the
constitutional framework and the ECHR , as well as from specific laws regulating government
access to data and data protection rules that apply to the processing of personal data for criminal
law enforcement (the Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities
that was set into force in the Faroe Islands in 2022 and transposes the legislation that was
adopted by Denmark to implement Directive (EU) 2016/680 in the Faroe Islands) and national
security purposes (contained in the Act on the Security and Intelligence Service). In addition,
effective oversight and redress mechanisms are available in this area.

Based on the overall findings set out in the SWD, the Commission concludes that the Faroe
Islands continue to provide an adequate level of protection for personal data transferred from
the EU.

   4.5.     Guernsey

The Commission welcomes the developments in the Guernsey legal framework since the
adoption of the adequacy decision, including legislative amendments and activities of oversight
bodies, which have contributed to an increased level of data protection. In particular, Guernsey
has significantly modernised its data protection framework by adopting the Data Protection
(Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law 2017 which applies since 2019 and aligns the Guernsey regime
closely with the GDPR.

In the area of government access to personal data, public authorities in Guernsey are subject to
clear, precise and accessible rules under which such authorities can access and subsequently
use for public interest objectives, in particular for criminal law enforcement and national
security purposes, data transferred from the EU. These limitations and safeguards follow from
the overarching legal framework and international commitments, notably the ECHR and
Convention 108, as well as from Guernsey data protection rules, including the specific
provisions for the processing of personal data in the law enforcement context set out in the Data
Protection (Law Enforcement and Related Matters) (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Ordinance, 2018.
In addition, Guernsey law imposes a number of specific conditions and limitations on the access
to and use of personal data for criminal law enforcement and national security purposes, and it
provides oversight and redress mechanisms in this area.

Based on the overall findings set out in the SWD, the Commission concludes that Guernsey
continues to provide an adequate level of protection for personal data transferred from the EU.

   4.6.     Isle of Man

The Commission welcomes the developments in the Manx legal framework since the adoption
of the adequacy decision, including legislative amendments and activities of oversight bodies,
which have contributed to an increased level of data protection. In particular, the Isle of Man
adopted new legislation in 2018 (the Data Protection Act 2018, complemented by the Data
Protection (Application of GDPR) Order 2018) that incorporates most of the provisions of the
EU’s data protection framework into the Manx legal order while making only minor
adjustments on specific aspects, in particular to adapt the framework to the local context.

                                                10
In the area of government access to personal data, public authorities in the Isle of Man are
subject to clear, precise and accessible rules under which such authorities can access and
subsequently use for public interest objectives, in particular for criminal law enforcement and
national security purposes, data transferred from the EU. These limitations and safeguards
follow from the overarching legal framework and international commitments, notably the
ECHR and Convention 108, as well as from Manx data protection rules, including the specific
provisions for the processing of personal data in the law enforcement context set out in the Data
Protection (Application of LED) Order 2018 and the LED Implementing Regulations 2018. In
addition, Manx law imposes a number of specific limitations on the access to and use of
personal data for criminal law enforcement and national security purposes, and it provides
oversight and redress mechanisms in this area.

Based on the overall findings set out in the SWD, the Commission concludes that the Isle of
Man continues to provide an adequate level of protection for personal data transferred from the
EU.

   4.7.     Israel

The Commission welcomes the developments in the Israeli legal framework since the adoption
of the adequacy decision, including legislative amendments, case law and activities of oversight
bodies, which have contributed to an increased level of data protection. In particular, Israel
introduced specific safeguards to reinforce the protection of personal data transferred from the
European Economic Area by adopting Privacy Protection Regulations (Instructions for Data
that was Transferred to Israel from the European Economic Area), 5783-2023. Israel also
strengthened the requirements for data security by adopting Privacy Protection (Data Security)
Regulations, 5777-2017 and consolidated the independence of its data protection supervisory
authority in a binding government resolution.

In the area of government access to personal data, public authorities in Israel are subject to
clear, precise and accessible rules under which such authorities can access and subsequently
use for public interest objectives, in particular for criminal law enforcement and national
security purposes, data transferred from the EU. These limitations and safeguards follow from
the overarching legal framework, notably the Israeli Basic Law, as well as from the Protection
of Privacy Law, 5741-1981 and the Regulations adopted thereunder, which apply to the
processing of personal data by Israeli public authorities, including for law enforcement and
national security purposes. In addition, Israeli law imposes a number of specific limitations on
the access to and use of personal data for criminal law enforcement and national security
purposes, and it provides oversight and redress mechanisms in this area.

Based on the overall findings set out in the SWD, the Commission concludes that Israel
continues to provide an adequate level of protection for personal data transferred from the EU.

At the same time, the Commission recommends enshrining in legislation the protections that
have been developed at sub-legislative level and by case law, in order to enhance legal certainty
and solidify these requirements. The Privacy Protection Bill (Amendment No. 14), 5722-2022
that has recently been introduced into the Israeli Parliament offers an important opportunity to

                                               11
consolidate and codify such developments, and thereby further strengthen the Israeli privacy
framework. The Commission will closely monitor future developments in this area.

   4.8.      Jersey

The Commission welcomes the developments in the Jersey legal framework since the adoption
of the adequacy decision, including legislative amendments, case law and activities of oversight
bodies, which have contributed to an increased level of data protection. In particular, Jersey has
significantly modernised its data protection framework by adopting the Data Protection (Jersey)
Law 2018 and the Data Protection Authority (Jersey) Law 2018 which entered into force in
2018 and align the Jersey regime closely with the GDPR.

In the area of government access to personal data, public authorities in Jersey are subject to
clear, precise and accessible rules under which such authorities can access and subsequently
use for public interest objectives, in particular for criminal law enforcement and national
security purposes, data transferred from the EU. These limitations and safeguards follow from
the overarching legal framework and international commitments, notably the ECHR and
Convention 108, as well as from Jersey data protection rules, including the specific provisions
for the processing of personal data in the law enforcement context set out in the Data Protection
(Jersey) Law 2018, as modified by Schedule 1 to that Law. In addition, Jersey law imposes a
number of specific limitations on the access to and use of personal data for criminal law
enforcement and national security purposes, and it provides oversight and redress mechanisms
in this area.

Based on the overall findings set out in the SWD, the Commission concludes that Jersey
continues to provide an adequate level of protection for personal data transferred from the EU.

   4.9.      New Zealand

The Commission welcomes the developments in the New Zealand legal framework since the
adoption of the adequacy decision, including legislative amendments, case law and activities of
oversight bodies, which have contributed to an increased level of data protection. In particular,
the data protection regime underwent a comprehensive reform with the adoption of the Privacy
Act 2020 that further increased the convergence with the EU’s data protection framework,
notably as regards the rules for international transfers of personal data and the powers of the
data protection authority (the Office of the Privacy Commissioner).

In the area of government access to personal data, public authorities in New Zealand are subject
to clear, precise and accessible rules under which such authorities can access and subsequently
use for public interest objectives, in particular for criminal law enforcement and national
security purposes, data transferred from the EU. These limitations and safeguards follow from
the overarching constitutional framework (e.g., the Bill of Rights Act) and case law, as well as
specific laws regulating government access to data and provisions of the Privacy Act that also
apply to the processing of personal data by criminal law enforcement and national security
authorities. In addition, the New Zealand legal system provides for different oversight and
redress mechanisms in this area.

                                               12
Based on the overall findings set out in the SWD, the Commission concludes that New Zealand
continues to provide an adequate level of protection for personal data transferred from the EU.
The Commission also welcomes the recent introduction of a bill before the Parliament by the
New Zealand government to amend the Privacy Act 2020 to further strengthen the existing
transparency requirements. The Commission will closely monitor future developments in this
area.

   4.10.     Switzerland

The Commission welcomes the developments in the Swiss legal framework since the adoption
of the adequacy decision, including legislative amendments, case law and activities of oversight
bodies, which have contributed to an increased level of data protection. In particular, the
modernised Federal Act on Data Protection that has further increased the convergence with the
EU’s data protection framework, notably with respect to the protections for sensitive data and
the rules on international data transfers. Switzerland also strengthened its international
commitments in the field of data protection by ratifying Convention 108+ in September 2023.

In the area of government access to personal data, public authorities in Switzerland are subject
to clear, precise and accessible rules under which such authorities can access and subsequently
use for public interest objectives, in particular for criminal law enforcement and national
security purposes, data transferred from the EU. These limitations and safeguards follow from
the overarching legal framework and international commitments, notably the Swiss Federal
Constitution, the ECHR and Convention 108+, as well as from Swiss data protection rules,
including the Federal Act on Data Protection and specific data protection rules that apply to
criminal law enforcement (e.g., the Criminal Procedure Code) and national security authorities
(e.g., the Intelligence Service Act). In addition, Swiss law imposes a number of specific
limitations on the access to and use of personal data for criminal law enforcement and national
security purposes, and it provides oversight and redress mechanisms in this area.

Based on the overall findings set out in the SWD, the Commission concludes that Switzerland
continues to provide an adequate level of protection for personal data transferred from the EU.

   4.11.     Uruguay

The Commission welcomes the developments in Uruguay’s legal framework since the adoption
of the adequacy decision, including several legislative amendments, case law and activities of
oversight bodies, which have contributed to an increased level of data protection. In particular,
Uruguay modernised and strengthened its Law 18.331 on the Protection of Personal Data and
the Habeas Data Action of 2008 through legislative amendments in 2018 and 2020 which
broadened the territorial scope of the data protection legislation, created new accountability
requirements (such as impact assessments, data protection by design and by default, data breach
notification and the appointment of data protection officers) and introduced additional
protections for biometric data. Uruguay also strengthened its international commitments in the
field of data protection by joining the Convention 108 in 2019, and by ratifying Convention
108+ in 2021.


                                               13
In the area of government access to personal data, public authorities in Uruguay are subject to
clear, precise and accessible rules under which such authorities can access and subsequently
use for public interest objectives, in particular for criminal law enforcement and national
security purposes, data transferred from the EU. These limitations and safeguards follow from
the overarching legal framework and international commitments, notably the Uruguayan
Constitution, the American Convention on Human Rights, Convention 108 and Convention
108+, as well as from the data protection rules in Law 18.331 on the Protection of Personal
Data and the Habeas Data Action that apply to the processing of personal data by public
authorities in Uruguay, notably for law enforcement and national security purposes. In addition,
Uruguayan law imposes a number of specific conditions and limitations on the access to and
use of personal data by public authorities, and it provides oversight and redress mechanisms in
this area.

Based on the overall findings made as part of this first review, the Commission concludes that
Uruguay continues to provide an adequate level of protection for personal data transferred from
the EU.

5. FUTURE MONITORING AND COOPERATION

The Commission recognises and very much values the excellent cooperation with the relevant
authorities in the each of the countries and territories concerned in the conduct of this review.
The Commission will continue to closely monitor developments in the protection frameworks
and actual practice of the countries and territories concerned. In case of developments in an
adequate country or territory that would negatively affect the level of data protection found
adequate, the Commission will, where necessary, make use of its powers under Article 45(5)
GDPR to suspend, amend or withdraw an adequacy decision.

This review confirms that the adoption of an adequacy decision is not an ‘end point’ but
provides an opportunity to further intensify the dialogue and cooperation with like-minded
international partners on data flows and digital matters more generally. In this regard, the
Commission looks forward to future exchanges with the relevant authorities to further
strengthen cooperation at international level on promoting safe and free data flows, including
through strengthened enforcement cooperation. To step up this dialogue and promote the
exchange of information, and experience, the Commission intends to organise a high-level
meeting in 2024, bringing together representatives from the EU and all countries that benefit
from an adequacy decision.




                                               14
