                             EUROPEAN
                             COMMISSION




                                                     Brussels, 15.1.2024
                                                     SWD(2024) 3 final




                      COMMISSION STAFF WORKING DOCUMENT

     Country reports on the functioning of the adequacy decisions adopted under Directive
                                           95/46/EC

                                 Accompanying the document

          Report from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council

      on the first review of the functioning of the adequacy decisions adopted pursuant to
                                Article 25(6) of Directive 95/46/EC

                                     {COM(2024) 7 final}




EN                                                                                           EN
                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. ANDORRA ............................................................................................................................ 2

II. REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA ........................................................................................ 22

III. CANADA .......................................................................................................................... 56

IV. FAROE ISLANDS ........................................................................................................... 96

V. BAILIWICK OF GUERNSEY ...................................................................................... 123

VI. ISLE OF MAN ............................................................................................................... 155

VII. STATE OF ISRAEL .................................................................................................... 182

VIII. JERSEY ....................................................................................................................... 215

IX. NEW ZEALAND ........................................................................................................... 247

X. SWITZERLAND ............................................................................................................. 280

XI. EASTERN REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY ..................................................................... 315




                                                                   1
                                               I. ANDORRA

1. RULES APPLYING TO THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA

    1.1. Relevant developments in the data protection framework of Andorra

The Commission adopted the adequacy decision for Andorra on 19 October 2010 1, after
having received the opinion of the Article 29 Working Party on 1 December 2009 2. The
decision found that, for the purposes of Article 25(2) of Directive 95/46/EC (Data Protection
Directive) 3, Andorra provided an adequate level of protection for personal data transferred
from the EU.

At the time of the adoption of the adequacy decision, the legislative framework for the
protection of personal data in Andorra consisted of the Qualified Law 15/2003 of 18
December 2003 on the protection of personal data 4 (LQPDP), as further implemented through
two Decrees of 1 July 2004 5. The LQPDP and its implementing regulations were largely
based on the standards of the former Data Protection Directive of the EU.

In November 2020, Andorra initiated a process to modernise the LQPDP, which led to the
adoption of the new Qualified Law 29/2021 on the protection of personal data (Data
Protection Act) 6 that entered into force in May 2022 7. As explained in more detail below, the
Data Protection Act is closely aligned with Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR) 8 in its
structure and main components, and significantly strengthens the Andorran data protection
framework.

As regards the scope of application, the LQPDP already followed the same approach as the
Data Protection Directive, while the new Data Protection Act brings the Andorran data
protection framework even closer to the GDPR. It not only defines the key notions of
‘personal data’ 9, ‘data subject’ 10 and ‘processing’ 11 in the same way as the GDPR, but also

1
   Commission Decision 2010/625/EU of 19 October 2010 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the adequate protection of personal data in Andorra, OJ L 277, 21.10.2010,
page 27.
2
     Opinion 7/2009 of 1 December 2009, available at: https://ec.europa.eu/justice/article-
29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2009/wp166_en.pdf.
3
   Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data.
4
   Available at: https://apda.ad/sites/default/files/2018-10/llei_qualificada_de_proteccio_de_dades_personals_-
_en.pdf - English version. All the references to the LQPDP have as a source the translation available on the
website of the Andorran Data Protection Authority.
5
  The first Decree approving the Regulations of the Andorran Data Protection Agency, and the second Decree the
Regulations of the Public Register for the Inscription of Personal Data Files. Both decrees were significantly
updated through the decree of 9 June 2010 approving the Regulations of the Andorran Data Protection Agency
(DPD),                   available                 at:               https://www.apda.ad/sites/default/files/2018-
10/decret_reglament_agencia_andorrana_proteccio_dades_-_en.pdf - English version.
6
  Act No. 80 of 7 June 2020 on the protection of personal data (Data Protection Act).
7
   According to its final provision, the Act entered into force six months after its publication in the official
gazette, which was on 17 November 2021. The Data Protection Act, as published in the official gazette, is
available at: https://www.bopa.ad/bopa/033119/Pagines/CGL20211115_08_58_32.aspx.
8
  Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of
natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).
9
  Article 4(1) Data Protection Act.
10
   Article 4(1) Data Protection Act.
11
   Article 4(3) Data Protection Act.

                                                        2
introduces definitions for the notions of ‘profiling’ 12 and ‘pseudonymization’ 13 that are
identical to the ones used in the GDPR. The Data Protection Act also provides for a more
comprehensive protection of personal data by no longer allowing certain specific data
protection regulations to prevail over its general rules in case of conflict 14 and by removing
certain partial exclusions that existed under the LQPDP 15.

At the time of the adoption of the Commission adequacy decision, the Andorran data
protection framework already contained all the basic data protection principles (i.e., the
principles of purpose limitation, data quality and proportionality, transparency, fairness, data
minimisation, accuracy, storage limitation, and integrity and confidentiality). Building on that
foundation, the Data Protection Act reinforces some of the existing principles, better aligning
them with the GDPR.

In particular, as regards the principle of lawfulness, the Data Protection Act specifies and
strengthens the notion of consent by adding a definition of this term in its Article 4(2) that is
identical to the one used in the GDPR, i.e., requiring that, in addition to being freely given,
specific and informed, consent must be unambiguous and expressed by a clear affirmative
action 16. Moreover, the Data Protection Act fully aligns the grounds that are available for
processing with those listed in Article 6(1) GDPR 17. Similarly, the Data Protection Act
reinforces the existing transparency requirements by requiring the information of the data
subject also in situations where data is not collected directly from the data subject 18.

The principle of data security has been strengthened in the Data Protection Act with respect to
the handling of data breaches. Under the LQPD and its implementing regulations, there was
no obligation to notify data breaches affecting personal data. The Data Protection Act
establishes a duty for data controllers to notify the supervisory authority (l’Agencia
Andorrana de Protecció de Dades, APDA) without undue delay and, if possible, within a
maximum period of 72 hours, after becoming aware of a data breach, unless it is unlikely that
the data breach constitutes a risk to the rights and freedoms of individuals 19.

Finally, the Data Protection Act includes several provisions that give effect to the principle of
accountability. Under the LQPDP, the APDA had already introduced some aspects of this
principle through a guideline, including the need to carry out impact assessments, keep

12
   Article 4(5) Data Protection Act.
13
   Article 4(8) Data Protection Act.
14
   The LQPDP contained a provision from which it followed that specific regulations covering public registries
were to be treated as lex specialis and that, in case of contradiction with the general rules of the LQPDP, such
specific regulations prevailed over those rules, see Article 8 LQPDP. The Data Protection Act does not contain
such a provision.
15
   Contrary to the current LQPDP, the Data Protection Act does not contain a partial exclusion from its scope of
application for data of natural persons linked to their business, professional or commercial activity, see Article
2(2) of the Data Protection Act.
16
   Article 17 LQPDP provided that the processing of personal data may only be carried out with the unequivocal
consent of the data subject. Consent is defined in Article 5(2) DPD as “any free, specific, clear, certain and
informed declaration of will, through which the person concerned consents to the processing of his/her personal
data”.
17
   Article 6 Data Protection Act.
18
   Article 17 Data Protection Act. Where personal data have not been obtained from the data subject, Article
17(5) of the Data Protection Act lists some exceptions to the transparency requirements. These exceptions are
similar to the ones listed in Article 14(5) GDPR.
19
   Article 36 Data Protection Act.

                                                        3
records of processing activities and appoint a data protection officer in certain cases 20.
Chapter IV of the Data Protection Act anchors these and other accountability requirements
more firmly into legislation, in particular by imposing an obligation to implement appropriate
technical and organisational measures to ensure and to be able to demonstrate that processing
is performed in accordance with the law 21, to implement the principles of data protection by
design and default 22, to carry out data protection impact assessments 23, to keep records of
processing and make them available to the APDA upon request 24, and to appoint a data
protection officer in certain situations 25.

Importantly, special categories of personal data (or sensitive data) benefit from enhanced
protection under the Data Protection Act. The Act expands the current notion of sensitive data
to cover all the categories of personal data that are considered ‘sensitive’ under the GDPR 26.
In particular, the categories of genetic and biometric data, data revealing racial origin or
philosophical beliefs and data concerning sexual life have been added to the list of special
categories 27. Moreover, the Data Protection Act imposes a general prohibition to process
sensitive data and the processing of sensitive data is only allowed in a limited number of
situations, corresponding to the situations in which the processing of sensitive data is allowed
under the GDPR 28.

The Data Protection Act also modernises and strengthens the existing provisions on data
protection rights. In particular, the provisions on the right to rectification 29, the right to
erasure 30 and the right to object 31 have been fully aligned with the GDPR. For example, the
right to erasure now includes an obligation for the controller to take reasonable steps to
inform other controllers that are processing the relevant information that the data subject has
requested the erasure of his data 32. The right to object is no longer limited to personal data not
collected directly from the data subject, and a specific right to object to direct marketing has
been introduced 33. Moreover, the right of access not only requires the controller to confirm,

20
                      Available                     at:                   https://www.apda.ad/sites/default/files/2018-
11/Gu%C3%ADa%20adaptaci%C3%B3%20al%20RGPD%20a%20Andorra.pdf.
21
   Article 27 Data Protection Act.
22
   Article 28 Data Protection Act.
23
   Article 32 Data Protection Act.
24
   Article 34 Data Protection Act.
25
   Article 38 Data Protection Act.
26
   The LQPDP already offered additional protection to sensitive data, which it defined as ‘data referring to
political opinions, religious beliefs, membership of political or trade union organisations, health, sex life or
ethnic origin of the interested parties’ (Article 3(11) LQPDP).
27
   Article 9(1) Data Protection Act.
28
   The processing of special categories of personal data is allowed for instance with the data subject’s explicit
consent, where processing is necessary to fulfil a legal obligation of the controller in the field of social security
law, where processing is necessary to protect the vital interest of the data subject, or where processing is
necessary for reasons of substantial public interest, see Article 9 Data Protection Act.
29
   Article 19 Data Protection Act.
30
   Article 20 Data Protection Act.
31
   Article 24 Data Protection Act.
32
   Article 20(3) Data Protection Act. Article 20(4) contains exceptions to the right of erasure, i.e. to the extent
that processing is necessary for exercising the right of freedom of expression and information; for compliance
with a legal obligation; for the establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims; or for archiving purposes,
historical, statistical or scientific purposes (in so far as erasure is likely to render impossible or seriously impair
the achievement of the objectives of that processing). These exceptions are similar to the ones listed in Article
17(3) GDPR.
33
   Article 24(2) Data Protection Act.

                                                          4
upon request of an individual, whether or not personal data concerning him/her is being
processed, and, where that is the case, give access to that data (as was already the case under
the LQPDP), but also requires the controller to provide further information, e.g., the purpose
of processing, the categories of personal data that is being processed, the source of personal
data, information on the retention period, the right to lodge a complaint with the APDA, the
existence of other rights, the fact that the controller intends to transfer the data to third
countries, and the existence of automated decision-making 34.

In addition to the strengthening of existing rights, new rights have been introduced in the Data
Protection Act, again mirroring the corresponding rights under the GDPR. In particular, the
Data Protection Act provides for specific safeguards and rights for individuals in the context
of automated decision-making. First, it requires controllers to provide individuals with
information on the existence of automated decision-making when collecting their personal
data 35. Second, when responding to an individual’s exercise of the right of access, controllers
are required to provide information on the existence of automated decision-making, as well as
meaningful information about the logic involved and the envisaged consequences of such
processing for the data subject 36. Third, the Data Protection Act introduces the right not to be
subject to a decision based solely on automated processing. Automated decision-making may
only take place under certain conditions, e.g., only where authorised by law or based on the
data subject’s explicit consent, and subject to specific safeguards, e.g., informing the
individual about the processing, the logic involved and the envisaged consequences 37. In case
of data processing intended for profiling, the controller must implement suitable measures to
safeguard the data subject’s rights and freedoms and legitimate interests, at least the right to
obtain human intervention on the part of the controller, to express his or her point of view and
to contest the decision. The Data Protection Act also introduces a right to the restriction of
processing 38 and a right to data portability 39, which each correspond to the relevant right in
the GDPR.

In terms of restrictions to the exercise of data subject rights, the Data Protection Act clarifies,
in identical terms as the GDPR, the conditions for the application of such restrictions by
introducing a provision which explicitly sets out that restrictions to data subject rights are
only allowed when they respect the essence of the fundamental rights and freedoms and are a
necessary and proportionate measure in a democratic society to safeguard certain important
objectives of general public interest such as national security, public security and the
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences 40.

As regards the international transfer of personal data, the Data Protection Act introduces
several changes to the existing transfer regime, putting in place a system that is very similar to
the rules on international transfers set out in Chapter V of the GDPR in terms of structure and
requirements.


34
   Article 18 Data Protection Act.
35
   Articles 16(j) and 17(2) (e) Data Protection Act.
36
   Article 18(1) (h) Data Protection Act.
37
   Article 25 Data Protection Act.
38
   Article 22 Data Protection Act.
39
   Article 23 Data Protection Act.
40
   Article 26 Data Protection Act.

                                                       5
As a general principle, international transfers may not be carried out when the third country
does not establish, in its current regulations, a level of protection for personal data at least
equivalent to that established under the Data Protection Act 41. Furthermore, when transferring
data to a third country, it must be ensured that the level of protection of natural persons
established by the Act is not diminished 42. The Data Protection Act stipulates that whether a
third country offers an equivalent level of protection will be determined on the basis of three
(alternative) criteria: whether the third country benefits from an adequacy decision from the
European Commission, whether the third country has effectively submitted itself to the
provisions of the modernised Convention 108 (Convention 108+) and whether the third
country is an EU Member State 43.

International transfers to third countries that do not offer an equivalent level of protection are
allowed where the controller or processor has provided appropriate safeguards, and on the
condition that enforceable data subject rights and effective legal remedies are available to the
data subject 44. The existence of such appropriate safeguards, enforceable rights and effective
remedies will be evaluated by the APDA taking into account a set of factors that are identical
to the factors listed in Article 45(2) GDPR. The instruments that can be used to provide for
appropriate safeguards are legally binding arrangements, binding corporate rules, standard
contractual clauses, whether adopted by the European Commission or the APDA, codes of
conduct and certification mechanisms in conformity with EU data protection rules 45.

Finally, the Data Protection Act reduces and clarifies the derogations for specific situations,
i.e., the situations in which transfers can take place to non-adequate third countries and
without the existence of appropriate safeguards. The new derogations are laid down in Article
45 of the Data Protection Act and closely resemble the derogations listed in Article 49
GDPR 46. The Data Protection Act stipulates that they must be interpreted restrictively 47.

Finally, the Andorran transfer regime has also been amended so that the above-mentioned
requirements cover not only transfers of personal data to third countries, but also to
international organisations 48.

     1.2. Oversight, enforcement and redress

The independent authority that is charged with oversight and enforcement under the Data
Protection Act is the APDA 49. The Agency oversees compliance with the Data Protection Act
by both private entities and by Andorran public authorities 50. It has the power to carry out


41
   Article 42(1) Data Protection Act.
42
   Article 42(2) Data Protection Act.
43
   Article 43 Data Protection Act.
44
   Article 44 Data Protection Act.
45
   Article 44(3) Data Protection Act. So far, the APDA has not adapted a set of standard contractual clauses.
46
   For instance, transfers to third countries or international organisations can take place when the data subject has
explicitly consented to the proposed transfer, when the transfer is necessary for the performance of a contract
between the data subject and the controller or the implementation of pre-contractual measures taken at the data
subject’s request, or when the transfer is necessary for important reasons of public interest.
47
   Article 45(4) Data Protection Act.
48
   Article 42(1) Data Protection Act.
49
   Article 46 Data Protection Act.
50
   Article 48 Data Protection Act.

                                                         6
inspections and impose sanctions for infringements of the Act 51. In addition, it carries out a
number of additional tasks, such as answering questions from public authorities and private
individuals or entities about the application of the data protection legislation, giving its
opinion on current and future data protection legislation, raising public awareness about data
protection, dealing with complaints it receives, and preparing annual reports on its activities52.
In carrying out its investigations, the Agency has access to any relevant information, as well
as to the premises where processing operations are carried out, including computer systems or
other resources used in data processing 53. It may also compel the production of evidence 54.

The Data Protection Act integrates in its Chapter VII the provisions of the DPD concerning
the APDA without significantly changing the composition, tasks and powers of the agency
and the statutory safeguards for its independence 55. It clarifies some aspects, including the
regime on incompatible activities applicable to the Head of the Agency and the inspectors as
well as on international cooperation. Furthermore, the Data Protection Act establishes a
specific sanctioning regime for public authorities, including reprimands and disciplinary
procedures to deal with staff liability 56. In addition, the decisions concerning public
authorities and bodies are made public through publication on the APDA’s website 57.

As regards possibilities for individuals to obtain redress, the Andorran system continues to
offer various avenues, including the possibility to lodge a complaint with the APDA 58, obtain
judicial redress directly against controllers and processors (both private operators and public
controllers) 59 and obtain compensation for damages 60.



51
   Article 67 Data Protection Act.
52
   Article 50 Data Protection Act.
53
   Article 62 Data Protection Act. During an inspection, the APDA’s inspectors may also carry out audits of the
computer systems of the controller or processor to verify that they comply with the requirements of the LQPDP.
54
   Article 62 Data Protection Act.
55
   The APDA is formed as a public authority with its own legal personality, independent of other public
authorities, and with full capacity to operate (Article 46 Data Protection Act). It is composed of the Head of the
APDA and two inspectors. Both the Head and the inspectors are appointed by the Parliament by a qualified (2/3)
majority for a term of four years. The appointment may be renewed at the end of each period. The APDA is
financed exclusively from the budget appropriations established each year for its functioning in the general
budget of the Parliament (Article 47 Data Protection Act). Regarding private entities, the APDA has the power to
impose fines, issue binding orders as well as non-binding instructions and recommendations (Article 67 Data
Protection Act). Furthermore, the APDA may bring and decide disciplinary proceedings against public entities,
including state-owned companies (Article 74(3) Data Protection Act). Under the Data Protection Act, the amount
of the maximum fine will depend on whether the violation is designated as a ‘very serious’, ‘serious’ or ‘minor’
offence, with fines ranging from € 500 minimum for a minor offence to € 100 000 maximum for a very serious
offence (see Article 73 Data Protection Act). Although public authorities cannot be sanctioned with a fine, the
APDA can issue instructions, recommendations and binding orders against those authorities. In addition, it can
urge the initiation of disciplinary proceedings against them and verify the effectiveness of such proceedings
(Article 74 Data Protection Act).
56
   Article 74 Data Protection Act.
57
   Article 74(5) Data Protection Act.
58
   Article 61 Data Protection Act.
59
   Article 41 of the Andorran Constitution stipulates that fundamental rights, including the right to privacy, are
protected by regular courts through urgent and preferential proceedings established by law that, in all cases,
involve court hearings at two levels. Moreover, the Andorran legal system provides for an extraordinary
procedure of appeal (empara) before the Constitutional Court (Article 42 and 102 of the Andorran Constitution),
which becomes available after the applicant has exhausted the previously mentioned urgent and preferential
procedure before the regular courts. The remedies that can be obtained through empara are the establishment of
the violation and its cessation.

                                                        7
Despite its relatively small office, the APDA plays an active role, both when it comes to its
engagement with stakeholders and exercising its oversight role.

Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, the APDA has issued several general and
specific guidance documents, which cover topics such as the application of the GDPR in
Andorra, data processing in the context of COVID-19, the processing of biometric data,
international transfers after Brexit, the principle of proportionality, transparency obligations,
cookies and obligations of the processor 61. Furthermore, the APDA has published several
guidance documents that aim to inform the general public about data protection, covering
topics such as teleworking, smart devices, data subject rights, collection of COVID-19 data in
restaurants and instant messaging apps 62. In addition, the APDA has created several templates
and standard forms to support compliance with data protection rules and the exercise of
individual rights, including a consent form, templates for the exercise of data subject rights, a
model complaint form and an international data transfer form 63.

Its annual reports show that the APDA handles a number of individual complaints every year.
For example, in 2020 it received nineteen complaints for alleged infringements of the
LQPDP, in 2019 it received thirteen such complaints, while in 2018 it received sixteen such
complaints. These complaints have on various occasions led to enforcement actions. For
example, during the period 2019-2020, in thirteen cases the APDA’s inspection service
decided to carry out an inspection to establish whether a violation of the rights enshrined in
the LQPDP and the DPD had taken place. In all of these thirteen cases a violation was
detected and based on the severity of the violation and the number of affected data subjects,
the APDA issued binding orders to remedy that violation. According to information received,
in one case, a fine was imposed, due to the seriousness of the detected violation and the fact
that the violation was a repeated offence 64.

Finally, the APDA fulfils an important consultative function. Every year it responds to
numerous queries made by natural or legal persons, as well as public authorities, with regard
to issues that have arisen in the context of their processing activities. For example, in 2020 a
total of 2116 of queries were submitted to the ADPA, in 2019 it received 1763 queries, while
in 2018 it received 1747 queries. The APDA also actively engages with the general public and
stakeholders. For example, in 2020, the APDA engaged in outreach activities to disseminate
information about the processing of personal data in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic,
aimed both at citizens and those responsible for such processing activities 65. In the same year,
the APDA participated in four television and three radio broadcasts 66. The APDA also


60
   They can also do so based on the causes for action, set out in in Law 30/2014 on civil protection of the rights
to privacy, honour and self-image. This law offers remedies to “illegitimate interference” with the
constitutionally protected rights to privacy, honour and self-image. An “illegitimate interference” is defined as
an act that breaches the core of these rights and which cannot be justified on one of the grounds specified in the
Act (see Article 4 of the Act). The Andorran authorities have explained that the available remedies are, after the
declaration, cessation and compensation for the damage caused.
61
   Available at: https://www.apda.ad/ca/guies-i-publicacions.
62
   Available at: https://www.apda.ad/ca/guies-i-publicacions.
63
   Available at: https://www.apda.ad/ca/models.
64
   Case No. 280-18 (unpublished).
65
   2020 Annual Report, p. 4, available at: https://www.apda.ad/ca/memories-de-lapda. The APDA has also
created a special website with information about data processing in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic:
66
   2020 Annual Report, p. 20. Available at: https://www.apda.ad/ca/memories-de-lapda.

                                                        8
regularly provides training in data protection to professionals. In 2019, for instance, the
APDA provided data protection training to the Andorran fiscal intelligence unit (UIFAND)
and the Federation of people with disabilities (FAAD) 67. In 2020, the APDA also analysed a
privacy impact assessment concerning the development of a COVID-19 contact tracing app,
focusing on the proportionality with respect to the purpose pursued 68.

2. ACCESS TO AND USE OF PERSONAL DATA TRANSFERRED FROM THE
   EUROPEAN UNION BY PUBLIC AUTHORITIES IN ANDORRA

In Andorra, the personal data of EU individuals transferred under the adequacy decision can
only be accessed by Andorran public authorities for purposes of criminal law enforcement. In
connection with the size of its territory (~464km2) and population (which does not exceed 80
000 inhabitants), there is no specific authority in Andorra engaged in the collection of
personal data for national security purposes, nor is there any specific legislation that allows
access to personal data for national security purposes 69. While the Andorran Police may be
entrusted with certain tasks in the area of national security 70, any data collection in that
context only takes place to prevent, investigate, detect or prosecute offences under the
Criminal Code and under the conditions and limitations set out in the Code of Criminal
Procedure 71.

     2.1 General legal framework

When collecting and (further) processing personal data for criminal law enforcement purposes
in Andorra, public authorities are subject to clear, precise and accessible rules governing the
scope and application of a measure and imposing minimum safeguards. These limitations and
safeguards follow from the overarching constitutional framework and specific laws that
regulate activities in the areas of criminal law enforcement.

First, as an exercise of power by a public authority, government access in Andorra must be
carried out in full respect of the law 72. In particular, fundamental rights and freedoms
recognised by the Constitution – which include the right to privacy, honour and reputation 73
and the inviolability of the home and the confidentiality of communications 74 – may only be

67
   2019 Annual Report, p. 19. Available at: https://www.apda.ad/ca/memories-de-lapda.
68
   2020 Annual Report, p. 11. Available at: https://www.apda.ad/ca/memories-de-lapda.
69
   In addition, Andorra has no army, nor military forces.
70
   In accordance with Article 10 Qualified Law 8/2004 the Police Corps may be entrusted with tasks in the field
of national security. According to explanations received, national security within the meaning of Law 8/2004
covers the maintenance of public security (such as guaranteeing citizen coexistence and public tranquillity,
fighting violence, ensuring the peaceful use of public spaces and preventing criminal acts).
71
    The Andorran authorities have explicitly confirmed that “personal data of EU individuals, transferred to
Andorra under the adequacy decision can only be accessed by Andorran public authorities for criminal law
enforcement purposes”.
72
   See Article 1 of the Constitution: “Andorra is a Democratic and Social independent State abiding by the Rule
of Law”. See also Article 3(2) of the Constitution, which guarantees the principles of equality, hierarchy,
publicity of the judicial rules, non-retroactivity of the rules restricting individual rights or those that are
unfavourable in their effect or sanction, legal certainty, accountability of public institutions and prohibition of
any kind of arbitrariness.
73
   Article 14 of the Constitution. According to the judgement of the High Court of Justice of 21 February 2019,
this right “must be interpreted in light of the European Convention on Human Rights, as the Constitutional Court
has been doing repeatedly (judgment of 11-14-2016, issued in case 2016-7-RE, and order of 6-4-2018, issued in
case 2018-15 -RE, among others)”.
74
   Article 15 of the Constitution.

                                                        9
restricted by means of a so-called qualified law (a law that can only be enacted by qualified
majority of the Parliament) 75. With respect to the inviolability of the home and the
confidentiality of communications specifically, the Constitution provides that interferences
with these rights are only allowed when a reasoned judicial warrant is issued 76.

Second, the right to the protection of personal data is also guaranteed through Andorra’s
adherence to the European Convention on Human Rights and the Council of Europe
Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal
Data (Convention 108). In addition, in October 2022, Andorra ratified the amending Protocol
creating the modernised Convention 108+ 77.

The European Convention on Human Rights protects the right to respect for private and
family life (and the right to the protection of personal data as part of it). In particular, pursuant
to Article 8 of that Convention, a public authority may only interfere with the right to privacy
in accordance with the law, in the interests of one of the aims set out in Article 8(2), and if
proportionate in light of that aim. Article 8 also requires that the interference is foreseeable,
i.e., has a clear, accessible basis in law, and that the law contains appropriate safeguards to
prevent abuse.

In addition, in its case law, the European Court of Human Rights has specified that any
interference with the right to privacy and data protection should be subject to an effective,
independent and impartial oversight system that must be provided for either by a judge or by
another independent body (e.g., an administrative authority or a parliamentary body) 78.
Moreover, individuals must be provided with an effective remedy, and the European Court of
Human Rights has clarified that the remedy must be offered by an independent and impartial
body which has adopted its own rules of procedure, consisting of members that must hold or
have held high judicial office or be experienced lawyers, and that there must be no evidential
burden to be overcome in order to lodge an application with it. In undertaking its examination
of complaints by individuals, the independent and impartial body should have access to all
relevant information, including closed materials. Finally, it should have the powers to remedy
non-compliance 79.

Convention 108 protects the individual’s right to privacy with regard to automatic processing
of personal data relating to him (data protection) 80. Article 9 of Convention 108 provides that
derogations from the general data protection principles (Article 5 Quality of data), the rules
governing special categories of data (Article 6 Special categories of data) and data subject
rights (Article 8 Additional safeguards to the data subject) are only permissible when such
derogation is provided for by the law of the Party and constitutes a necessary measure in a
democratic society in the interests of protecting State security, public safety, the monetary

75
   Article 40, read in conjunction with Article 57(3) of the Constitution.
76
   Article 15 of the Constitution. The provision furthermore sets out the only exceptional circumstance in which a
dwelling may be entered against the will of the owner or without a court warrant, namely in case of flagrante
delicto (when an individual is caught while committing the offence).
77
   See the current chart of signatures and ratifications, available at: https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-
list?module=signatures-by-treaty&treatynum=223
78
   European Court of Human Rights, Klass and others v. Germany, Application no. 5029/71, paragraphs 17-51.
79
   European Court of Human Rights, Kennedy v. the United Kingdom, Application no. 26839/05, (Kennedy),
paragraphs 167 and 190.
80
   Article 1 of Convention 108.

                                                        10
interests of the State or the suppression of criminal offences, or for protecting the data subject
or the rights and freedoms of others.

Therefore, through adherence to the European Convention on Human Rights and Convention
108, as well as its submission to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights,
Andorra is subject to a number of obligations, enshrined in international law, that frame its
system of government access on the basis of principles, safeguards and individual rights
similar to those guaranteed under EU law and applicable to the Member States.

These international obligations are anchored in the Andorran legal framework through the
Constitution, which provides that international agreements such as the European Convention
on Human Rights and Convention 108, from the moment of their publication in the official
state gazette, form part of Andorran law and may not be amended or overridden by domestic
laws 81. They are thus of direct application in Andorra and can be directly invoked before the
Andorran courts 82.

Third, the processing of personal data by Andorran public authorities for law enforcement
purposes is subject to specific data protection rules under the new Data Protection Act. These
specific rules are set out in the Data Protection Act’s third final provision and essentially
replicate the core elements of the Law Enforcement Directive. The material scope of these
rules is identical to the one of the Law Enforcement Directive. They apply to the processing
of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation,
detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including
the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security 83. Furthermore, the
data protection principles of lawfulness and fairness, purpose limitation, data minimisation,
accuracy, storage limitation and security are formulated using almost the exact same terms as
Article 4(1) Law Enforcement Directive. In addition, these rules impose transparency
obligations and, like the Law Enforcement Directive, establish the data subject rights of
access, correction and deletion 84. For the same purposes as those recognised in the Law
Enforcement Directive 85 controllers are allowed to deny, in whole or in part, requests to
exercise the rights of access, correction and deletion. Controllers may only restrict those rights
having due regard to the fundamental rights and interest of the concerned individual 86.
Finally, the Andorran Data Protection Authority (ADPA) is charged with monitoring and
enforcing these specific rules 87.

The specific rules set out in the Data Protection’s Act third final provision anticipate on
planned future legislation in this area. In particular, the third final provision instructs the


81
   Article 3(4) of the Constitution.
82
   See Human Rights Council, National report submitted by Andorra to the United Nations Human Rights
Council in accordance with paragraph 15(a) of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1,
A/HRC/WG.6/AND/1, p. 4.
83
   Third final provision of the Data Protection Act, paragraph 1.
84
   Third final provision of the Data Protection Act, paragraph 3.
85
   See Articles 15(1) and 16(4), i.e., to avoid obstructing official or legal inquiries, investigations or procedures,
prejudicing the prevention, detection, investigation or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of
criminal penalties, protect public security, protect national security or to protect the rights and freedoms of
others.
86
   See previous footnote.
87
   Third final provision of the Data Protection Act, paragraph 4.

                                                         11
Andorran government to present in Parliament, within two years from the entry into force of
the Act (thus in May 2024 at the latest), a bill that regulates in more detail and following the
model set out in the Law Enforcement Directive the processing of personal data by competent
authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of
criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against
and the prevention of threats to public security. The specific rules contained in the third final
provision apply until the entry into force of this future legislation. A draft Bill on the
processing of personal data by public authorities for law enforcement purposes is currently
being prepared.

The Commission services welcome the Andorran legislator’s intention to replace the specific
rules by a more permanent and detailed regime that is even further aligned with the rules that
apply in the EU. They will closely monitor future developments in this area.

The general limitations and safeguards mentioned above can be invoked by individuals before
independent oversight bodies (e.g., the APDA, see section 2.2.3) and courts (see section 2.2.4)
to obtain redress.

     2.2. Access and use by Andorran public authorities for criminal law enforcement
          purposes

In Andorra, criminal law enforcement functions are carried out by the police force, officially
called the Police Force of the Principality of Andorra (Cos de Policia del Principat
d’Andorra), which is headed by the Director. In the specific case of financial crime, the
responsible authority is the Andorran financial intelligence unit (UIFAND) 88. Andorran law
imposes a number of limitations on the access to and use of personal data for criminal law
enforcement purposes, and it provides oversight and redress mechanisms in this area. The
conditions under which access to personal data can take place and the safeguards applicable to
the use of these powers are assessed in the following sections.

         2.2.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

Personal data transferred under the adequacy decision and processed by organisations in
Andorra may be obtained by Andorran law enforcement authorities by means of investigative
measures or interception measures under the Code of Criminal Procedure. The Code of
Criminal Procedure lays down clear and precise rules on the scope and application of these
measures, thereby ensuring that the interference with the rights of individuals will be limited

88
   The UIFAND operates on the basis of Law 14/2017 on the prevention and fight against money laundering and
terrorist financing. In short, the relevant parts of this law require undertakings and persons covered by this Act
(so-called “reporting entities” such as financial institutions or members of independent legal professions such as
lawyers and notaries, among others) to inform UIFAND, on their own initiative, when they suspect, or have
reasonable grounds to presume, that a transaction or attempted transaction is or has been connected to money
laundering or financing of terrorism (Article 20 of Law 14/2017). Prior to such a notification, the Act requires
undertakings and persons covered by the Act to investigate certain suspicious transactions (e.g.,complex or
unusual transactions whose economic or lawful purpose is not apparent) and store, for a period of 5 years
(extendable by UIFAND once for five years) documents, as well as transactions’ proofs and records, information
on the accounts, business correspondence and the results of all the analyses performed (Article 37 of Law
14/2017). The reporting entities are exempt from the Data Protection Act when performing these processing
operations (Article 38(3) of Law 14/2017). In case the UIFAND finds indications for or the existence of money
laundering or terrorist financing suspicions, it reports to the Public Prosecutor’s Office (Article 55(2)(m) of Law
14/2017).

                                                        12
to what is necessary for a specific criminal investigation and proportionate to the pursued
purpose 89. Moreover, to exercise any of these powers, prior judicial authorisation is in
principle required 90. The police only have warrantless powers in exceptional cases, which are
specifically listed in the Code of Criminal Procedure 91.

To gather evidence, the police may conduct searches of homes or other premises where an
offence presumably has taken place. Unless the affected person has given prior and written
consent, subject to prior notice that (s)he has the right to refuse, searches may only take place
based on a court-issued search warrant 92. The search warrant must specify the address where
the search is to be carried out, the grounds on which it is based and the reasons for conducting
it 93. Moreover, according to established case law of the Constitutional Court interpreting these
requirements, the judge issuing the warrant must give a reasoned decision explaining the
necessity and proportionality of the measure 94.

As regards the execution of the search warrant, the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that
the search warrant must be presented to any person occupying the home or other premise. In
case of the absence of the occupant, the search must be carried out in the presence of a court
clerk who must draw up a detailed record 95.

When conducting a search, the police may seize all assets relating to the offense 96. Any kind
of object may be seized, including computer discs or other data storage devices. The seize
power cannot be used, however, to gain access to the content of such devices. If the data
stored on the seized device is not accessible without the consent of the owner/holder, a prior
judicial authorisation specifically issued to have access to this content is required 97.
According to information received, such authorisation may only be granted under the stricter


89
   This has been specifically recognised, regarding access to communications, by the European Court of Human
Rights. See European Court of Human Rights 8 November 2016, Figueiredo Teixeira v. Andorra, Application
no. 72384/14, paragraph 42: “In the present case, the Court finds that Article 87 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure in force at the material time set out in detail the conditions under which interference with the right to
privacy was permitted (…)”.
90
   Article 26(2) Code of Criminal Procedure, which provides that obtaining any evidence that may affect the
integrity or privacy of the person under investigation requires prior judicial authorization in case of refusal or
lack of express consent.
91
   Article 26(2) Code of Criminal Procedure. The following activities are exempted from the requirement of prior
judicial authorisation, provided there is no risk to the person’s health nor for cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment: identification; fingerprinting or anthropomorphic examinations; information and search on personal
records, property, or vehicle registers, provided that they do not constitute the person’s registered address; and
physical inspection and examination (not) affecting intimate parts of the body.
92
   Article 26(1)(a) Code of Criminal Procedure.
93
   Article 26(1)(a) Code of Criminal Procedure.
94
   See the judgments of the Constitutional Court of 20 April 2015, Janer Rossell v. Andorra, Application no.
2014-44-RE and 3 February 2014, Puig Ariet v. Andorra, Application no. 2013-32-RE. According to this case
law, measures resulting in the restriction of liberty, including their nature, manner and timing of execution,
duration and intensity must be the result of a weighted jurisdictional consideration. This involves examining all
the circumstances present together, weighing the seriousness of the crime attributable to the subject, measuring
the notoriety of the evidence or evidence existing against him and also the undesirable effects that could result
from not adopting the measures of arrest, surveillance, search, etc., including the possible escape of the suspect
or the destruction of evidence.
95
   Article 26(1)(a) Code of Criminal Procedure. Exceptionally, for reasons of urgency, the search may be carried
out without the presence of a court clerk, with the prior verbal authorization of the judge, who must give reasons
for the authorization afterwards.
96
   Article 26(1)(b) Code of Criminal Procedure.
97
   Article 26(2) Code of Criminal Procedure.

                                                        13
conditions for the accessing of communications, set out in the Code of Criminal Procedure 98
(see below).

Illegal searches and seizures are subject to criminal sanctions 99 and any evidence that is
obtained directly or indirectly through a violation of the fundamental rights and freedoms of
individuals is considered inadmissible 100.

The police may furthermore collect evidentiary material through the interception of
communications. The Code of Criminal Procedure recognises three types of communications
(telephone, telegraphic and postal) and stipulates that such communications may only be
intercepted in the context of a criminal investigation involving a major offence (e.g., drug
trafficking) or a minor offence in the area of corruption or influence peddling 101. In addition,
the measure must be necessary for the purpose of seeking the truth 102.

Interceptions may only take place based on a prior court authorisation 103. The court order
must specify the (major) offence in question, the suspects, the reasons why it is necessary to
use this procedure, and all the identifying elements of the communication to be intercepted 104.
Furthermore, it must state the period within which the measure may be carried out. This
period may not exceed two months and may be extended twice, by reasoned court order,
under the same conditions 105. In addition, the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that the
court must give a reasoned decision explaining the necessity and proportionality of the
measure and mentioning the evidence obtained, the seriousness of the offence under
investigation and the impact on the fundamental right at stake, which must always be
guaranteed in its essence 106.

As regards the execution of the court order, the Code of Criminal Procedure stipulates that the
interception shall be carried out by a person or department designated by the judge, who is
bound by professional secrecy and must keep records, under the supervision of the
investigating judge 107. After the interception has been concluded, the individual whose
communication has been intercepted must be notified by the court in case the measure did not




98
   Article 87 Code of Criminal Procedure.
99
   Articles 194-196 Criminal Code.
100
    Article 9(3) Qualified Law on Justice.
101
    Article 87(2) Code of Criminal Procedure. An offence is considered a major offence if it has at least one
penalty whose maximum limit exceeds those described in Article 36 of the Criminal Code on sanctions for minor
offences, see Article 12 of the Criminal Code. Penalties listed in Article 36 include imprisonment for up to two
years or a fine of up to 60 000 euros. Minor offences are those that have at least one penalty whose maximum
limit exceeds those described in Article 37 on sanctions for criminal contraventions. Penalties listed in Article 37
include house arrest for up to a month or a fine of up to 6 000 euros.
102
    Article 87(2) Code of Criminal Procedure. Even though the wording of the provision states that interception
of communications is allowed if this can be considered ‘useful’ for the purpose of finding the truth, in practice
the courts interpret it as a condition of necessity. See for example, the ruling of the Constitutional Court of 15
March 2019, Campos Tomás vs. Andorra, Application no. 514-2018 and the ruling of the Constitutional Court of
19 April 2021, Miquel Prats and others vs. Andorra, Application no. 25-2021.
103
    Article 87(2) Code of Criminal Procedure.
104
    Article 87(2)(b) Code of Criminal Procedure.
105
    Article 87(2)(b) Code of Criminal Procedure.
106
    Article 87(5) Code of Criminal Procedure.
107
    Article 87(2)(c) Code of Criminal Procedure.

                                                        14
produce evidence of a crime or in case the court has decreed the total or partial secrecy of the
measure 108, if the confidentiality of the measure is lifted 109.

Illegal wiretapping and related conduct are subject to criminal sanctions 110 and any evidence
that is obtained directly or indirectly through a violation of the fundamental rights and
freedoms of individuals is considered inadmissible 111.

Finally, the UIFAND may obtain personal data through disclosure by private individuals,
business organisations or public authorities.

Law 14/2017 112 on the prevention and fight against money laundering and terrorist financing
imposes an obligation on persons and undertakings subject to the law, such as financial
institutions (so-called ‘parties under obligation’), 113 to report to the UIFAND, on their own
initiative, any transaction or attempted transaction related to funds where the party is aware
of, knows, suspects or has reasonable grounds to suspect that are the proceeds of criminal
activity or are related to terrorist financing, and to promptly respond to requests made by the
UIFAND for additional information in such cases 114. A similar reporting duty applies to
Andorran public authorities, including judicial authorities, who discover facts that could
constitute indicia or proof of money laundering or terrorist financing. In those cases, they
shall inform the UIFAND in writing and make available to it the information that the
UIFAND requests in the exercise of its duties 115.

Prior to notifying the UIFAND, parties under obligation are required by the Act to investigate
certain suspicious transactions (e.g., complex or unusually large transactions whose economic
or lawful purpose is not apparent) and store, for a period of five years (extendable by
UIFAND once for five years) all documents, data and information obtained under the
application of the Act, receipts and registers of operations and transactions, account files and
business correspondence, and the results of any analysis undertaken, including, where

108
    Article 46 Code of Criminal Procedure provides that “during the investigation of the summary for major
crimes, the judge, ex officio, at the proposal of the Public Prosecutor or any of the parties, by means of a
reasoned order, can decree the secrecy of the whole or a part, making a separate piece in the latter case, up to a
maximum non-extendable period of six months, and with the obligation to lift the secrecy at least one month
before the conclusion of the judicial investigations”.
109
    Article 87(3) Code of Criminal Procedure.
110
    Article 183 and 189 Criminal Code.
111
    Article 9(3) Qualified Law on Justice.
112
     Article 20 of Law 14/2017. An unofficial English translation of this law is available at:
https://www.uifand.ad/images/stories/Docs/VF_Text_refos_ANG.pdf
113
    The “parties under obligation” are defined in Article 2 Law 14/2017 and include financial parties under
obligation (i.e. operative entities of the financial system, insurance and reinsurance undertakings, authorized
payment service providers), natural persons or legal entities, in the exercise of their professional activity (i.e. tax
advisers, notaries, lawyers and other independent legal professionals) and non-resident natural and legal persons
which carry out in Andorra any activity of the same nature as those listed in Article 2.
114
    Parties under obligation furthermore must provide the UIFAND, at its request, with all the information
necessary for the exercise of its functions. All suspicious transactions, including attempted transactions, must be
reported. Once the report has been made or after an information request, the parties under obligation must submit
to the UIFAND any new element concerning the report of which they are aware.
115
    Article 66(1) and (2) Law 14/2017. Likewise, civil servants and other personnel in the service of the
Andorran public administration that discover these facts must make them known immediately to the body in
which they work. Article 23 Law 14/2017 furthermore stipulates that if, in the course of checks carried out on
the parties under obligation by the competent authorities for prudential supervision, or in any other way, those
authorities discover facts that could be related to money laundering or to terrorist financing, they shall promptly
inform the UIFAND.

                                                          15
available, information obtained through electronic identification means as set out in the Law
on electronic trust services 116. Any such processing operations performed under the Act by
the parties under obligation may only be performed for the purposes of the Act and the
concerned data may not be processed in a way that is incompatible with those purposes.
Processing of personal data based on the Act for any other purposes, such as commercial
purposes, is prohibited 117.

         2.2.2. Further use of the information collected

The further use of data collected by Andorran criminal law enforcement authorities on one of
the grounds referred to in Section 2.2.1, as well as the sharing of such data with a different
authority for purposes other than the ones for which it was originally collected is subject to
safeguards and limitations.

First, the processing of personal data by law enforcement authorities in Andorra is governed
by the specific rules set out in the Data Protection Act as described in section 2.1 118. With
respect to onward sharing, it follows from the Data Protection Act that personal data collected
for law enforcement purposes may be further processed (whether by the original controller or
by another controller) for any other law enforcement purpose, provided that the controller is
authorised by law to process data for the other purpose 119. In this case, all the safeguards
provided by the Data Protection Act and, where applicable, the specific rules referred to in
section 2.1 apply to the processing carried out by the receiving authority.

Second, the different laws that allow for data collection by criminal law enforcement
authorities in Andorra impose specific limitations and safeguards as to the use and further
dissemination of the information obtained in exercising the powers they grant.

As regards the powers of search and seizure, the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that a
detailed record must be made of all the assets seized 120. The seized objects must be sealed and
added to the investigation file, together with the inventory 121. The seal on all the seized goods


116
    Article 37 Law 14/2017.
117
    Article 38(1) Law 14/2017 states that personal data shall be processed by the parties under obligation on the
basis of the Act only for its purposes and shall not be further processed in a way that is incompatible with those
purposes. Based on Article 38(3) Law 14/2017, processing of personal data obtained under this Law is not
subject to the provisions of the Data Protection Act. However, according to explanations received, this exception
applies solely to the parties under obligation (e.g., financial institutions), and only for personal data obtained in
the application of Law 14/2017.
118
    As explained in section 2.1 above, the specific rules provide that the processing of personal data collected by
Andorran criminal law enforcement authorities, including the further sharing of such data with other authorities
in Andorra or in a third country, is subject to all basic data protection principles, including lawfulness and
fairness, purpose limitation, data minimisation, data accuracy, storage limitation and data security. See the Third
final provision, paragraph 2, of the Data Protection Act. Once Andorra has adopted the Bill on the processing of
personal data for law enforcement purposes, referred to section 2.1 above, the rules applying to the processing of
personal data by Andorran law enforcement authorities will be become more detailed.
119
    Article 5(4) Data Protection Act stipulates that the processing of personal data for the purposes of prevention,
investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offenses, or enforcement of criminal sanctions, including
protection against threats to public safety and prevention can only be carried out if the person responsible for the
treatment is authorized by law to process such data.
120
    Article 26(1)(b) and 78 Code of Criminal Procedure.
121
    When because of its volume or other characteristics, the seized goods cannot be attached to the file, an
inventory must be made indicating the place where each good is located and the person who takes charge of it,
and the goods must remain at the judge’s disposal. See Article 26(1)(b) Code of Criminal Procedure.

                                                         16
can only be lifted by the trial judge (batlle) or the court 122. Importantly, the trial judge must
adopt the resolutions it deems appropriate to guarantee the restitution of the seized objects if
they are not of interest to the case 123.

With respect to the interception of communications, Article 87 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure sets out the safeguards that need to be applied to the intercepted material. Notably,
recorded tapes, or the (computer) medium on which the communications are stored, must be
fully sealed, and attached to the investigation file. The trial judge chooses the texts or
documents to be used in the case. Unused recordings are to be kept as an annex to the file and
must be destroyed, along with the used recordings, under the supervision of the judicial
authority as soon as the case is closed.

In terms of investigative measures carried out in the context of the fight against money
laundering and terrorism financing, Law 14/2017 requires the UIFAND to submit to the
Public Prosecutor’s Office the cases in which there is reasonable suspicion of the commission
of a criminal offence 124. It furthermore requires the UIFAND to share with other public
authorities in Andorra (e.g., the Police Force, the Customs Service) any information that is
essential for the exercise of their functions 125. The UIFAND may only respond to requests for
information from other competent authorities in Andorra when these requests are motivated
by concerns relating to money laundering, associated predicate offences or terrorist
financing 126. In exceptional circumstances, where disclosure of the requested information
would be clearly disproportionate to the legitimate interests of a natural or legal person or
irrelevant with regard to the purposes for which it has been requested, the UIFAND is under
no obligation to comply with the request for information 127.

In addition, the UIFAND is required to share, spontaneously or upon request, any information
that may be relevant for the processing or analysis of information by other (foreign) financial
intelligence units or equivalent bodies related to money laundering, its predicate offences, or
terrorist financing and the natural or legal person involved 128. The exchange of information
requires prior approval from the head of the UIFAND. The party receiving the information
must furthermore prove, prior to receiving the information, that certain conditions are met,
including that the receiving state shall not use the information for any other purpose than that
sought by the Act and that the foreign services receiving the information are bound, under




122
    Article 26(1)(b) Code of Criminal Procedure.
123
    Article 79 Code of Criminal Procedure.
124
    Article 55(2)(m) Law 14/2017. Based on Article 67 Law 14/2017, the UIFAND must inform the Andorran
Financial Authority (AFA), in its condition as the body that exercises the disciplinary power of the financial
system and the insurance and reinsurance sector, of all transfer of files, whether to the Public Prosecutor’s
Office, or to the Government, when entities of the financial system or the insurance and reinsurance sector are
implicated. This information includes the name of the entity under the supervision of the AFA, a description of
the facts observed, and the accounts mentioned in the file.
125
    Article 55(2)(d) and (l) Law 14/2017.
126
    Article 55(6) Law 14/2017.
127
    Article 55(7) Law 14/2017. Based on this provision, the UIFAND is furthermore not obliged to comply with
the request, if there are objective grounds for assuming that the provision of such information would have a
negative impact on ongoing investigations or analyses.
128
    Article 68(1) Law 14/2017. This duty applies regardless of the type of predicate offences and also if the type
of predicate offences is not defined at the time of the exchange.

                                                       17
threat of criminal sanction, by a duty of professional secrecy 129. The UIFAND must use
secure channels to exchange information with other financial intelligence units 130.

Law 32/2021 provides the rules on mutual legal assistance in criminal matters. It stipulates
that request for legal assistance that refer to bank accounts or the interception of
communications, are executed by the trial judge or the competent court, after hearing the
Prosecutor’s Office and after having verified compliance of the request with Andorran law131.
The request must contain sufficient elements to allow the legality of the requested measure to
be assessed in accordance with Andorran law and must be accompanied by the decision of the
judicial authority of the requesting state 132. In view of the subject-matter and reason of the
request, and before communicating the recordings or transcripts to the requesting state, the
court must destroy the parts of the recordings or transcripts that are not of interest to the
criminal procedure for which the measures have been requested 133. No information obtained
from the Andorran authorities through judicial assistance can be used in the requesting state
for purposes other than those specified and, more specifically, for other offenses or facts
punishable than those that have been indicated there and of which the Andorran judge has
been able to assess of the compatibility with Andorran law 134.

Finally, Andorra has concluded separate international agreements with France and Spain 135
which provide specific safeguards with regard to the sharing of personal data collected for law
enforcement purposes. In particular, disclosure can only take place with the express written
authorisation of the competent authority of the transferring party, data may only be used for
the purposes defined and under the conditions set by the transferring party, and there is a
requirement to keep a record of the transferred data 136.


129
    Article 68(3) Law 14/2017. Based on this provision, the UIFAND may furthermore refuse to exchange
information where there are reasonable grounds to assume that the communication of this information may
jeopardise ongoing investigations or analysis.
130
    Article 68(4) Law 14/2017.
131
    Article 32 Law 32/2021.
132
    Article 33 Law 32/2021. Based on Article 4 of 32/201, requests for legal assistance can only be granted if the
following conditions are met: (1) the procedure abroad is in accordance with the constitutional principles of the
Principality regarding the rights and freedoms guaranteed in the third chapter of Title II of the Constitution, (2)
the requested measure is not contrary to the fundamental principles of the Andorran legal system, (3) there are no
sufficient reasons to suppose that the procedure has been instigated against a person because of his political
opinions, his quality as a member of a certain social group, his race, the their religion or their nationality, (4) all
the crimes on which the rogatory commission is based are punishable by Andorran law as a crime, (5) the person
subject to the claim has not been convicted by a final sentence in the Principality and has served the sentence or
has not been acquitted in Andorra for the same facts, (6) the facts that motivate the request are not of a political
nature and the request is not made with a political purpose, (7) the facts that motivate the request, even if they
constitute a crime according to Andorran law, are of sufficient importance to justify the intervention of Andorran
justice, (8) the communication of the information does not harm the sovereignty, security, public order or other
essential interests of the Principality.
133
    Article 34 Law 32/2021.
134
    Article 5 Law 32/2021.
135
     According to information received from the Andorran authorities, sharing of data collected for law
enforcement purposes predominantly takes place with Andorra’s neighbouring countries, France and Spain.
136
    The agreement with France on cross-border cooperation in police and customs issues was signed on 19 March
2014 and entered into force on 1 April 2018. The agreement is available at:
http://www.consellgeneral.ad/fitxers/documents/tractats-i-acords/2014-1/acord-entre-el-govern-del-principat-
d2019andorra-i-el-govern-de-la-republica-francesa-relatiu-a-la-cooperacio-transfronterera-en-materia-policial-i-
duanera. The provisions in Article 42(1) to (10) of the agreement specify the obligations on the parties regarding
data protection. The agreement with Spain concerning the cooperation for fighting against crime and security
was signed in 2015 but has not yet entered into force. The agreement is available at:

                                                          18
         2.2.3. Oversight

In Andorra, the activities of criminal law enforcement authorities are supervised by different
bodies.

First, the APDA is competent to oversee whether the Andorran police complies with the
specific data protection rules set out in the Data Protection Act’s third final provision (see
section 2.1) 137. The APDA has the power to carry out inspections and impose sanctions for
infringements of the Act 138. In carrying out its investigations, the Agency has access to any
relevant information, as well as to the premises where processing operations are carried out,
including computer systems or other resources used in data processing 139. It may also compel
the production of evidence 140.

Second, an independent Ombudsman (Raonador del ciutadá) is elected by the Andorran
Parliament to defend and oversee the fulfillment and application of constitutional rights and
liberties and to ensure that the public sector adheres to constitutional principles 141. It is
competent to investigate complaints from individuals who believe their rights have been
infringed by the public administration, including the Andorran police 142. It can also prepare,
at its own initiative, reports or recommendations on matters of interest to citizens or society at
large, or on matters relating to any of the functions entrusted to him 143. The independence of
the Ombudsman is guaranteed by law 144. In carrying out its investigations, the Ombudsman
has access to all relevant information 145. Based on the findings of his investigation, the
Ombudsman may issue warnings, make recommendations, and otherwise state his views of a
case 146. An annual report is laid before parliament with recommendations based on the
Ombudsman’s operations throughout the year 147. In this report he can also recommend the




http://www.consellgeneral.ad/ca/arxiu/arxiu-de-lleis-i-textos-aprovats-en-legislatures-anteriors/vii-legislatura-
2015-2019/copy_of_tractats-i-acords-internacionals-aprovats/conveni-entre-el-principat-d2019andorra-i-el-
regne-d2019espanya-sobre-cooperacio-en-materia-de-lluita-contra-la-delinquencia-i-seguretat.          The       data
protection safeguards are included in its Article 9.
137
    Third final provision, paragraph 4, of the Data Protection Act.
138
    Article 67 Data Protection Act.
139
    Article 62 Data Protection Act. During an inspection, the APDA’s inspectors may also carry out audits of the
computer systems of the controller or processor to verify that they comply with the requirements of the LQPDP.
140
    Article 62 Data Protection Act.
141
    Article 1 and 8 Law on the creation and functioning of the Ombudsman.
142
    Article 2(3) Law on the creation and functioning of the Ombudsman. According to explanations received,
complaints must be made in writing and must contain the contact details of the complainant, and the reasons for
the complaint. They can be made in person at the Ombudsman’s office, or can be sent by conventional mail, fax,
e-mail or by filling out the form available on the website. A personal interview is conducted with the
Ombudsman, who decides within a maximum of 13 working days on the acceptance or non-acceptance of the
request. If the request is accepted, the Ombudsman initiates the investigation.
143
    Article 5 Law on the creation and functioning of the Ombudsman.
144
    Article 6(1) Law on the creation and functioning of the Ombudsman. The Ombudsman enjoys immunity for
the opinions he expresses and acts he performs in the exercise of his functions (Article 6(2) of the Act). S/he is
appointed for a (non-renewable) period of six years and can only be dismissed on specific grounds, see Article
9(3) of the Act (e.g., by express resignation, in case of manifest negligence in the exercise of his functions,
which may only be declared by an absolute majority of Parliament, or in case of a criminal conviction). The
Ombudsman has its own budget, which is approved by the Parliament (Article 18 of the Act).
145
    Article 19(3) Law on the creation and functioning of the Ombudsman.
146
    Article 20 Law on the creation and functioning of the Ombudsman.
147
    Article 21 Law on the creation and functioning of the Ombudsman.

                                                        19
introduction of changes or modifications in the existing legislation in case he observes a
possible violation of human rights 148.

         2.2.4. Redress

The Andorran system offers different (judicial) avenues to obtain redress, including
compensation for damages.

First, the Data Protection Act provides the rights of access, rectification, deletion and
restriction with respect to personal data processed for criminal law purposes 149. In the event a
controller refuses or restricts the exercise of these rights, the concerned person may lodge a
complaint with the APDA 150. Decisions of the APDA can be appealed in court, after having
exhausted the prior internal administrative review procedure 151. The subsequent judicial
process entails a review of the facts and the decision adopted by the APDA, with the judge
being able to revoke or rectify the decision if it violates the appellant’s right. The appellant
can also claim compensation for damages suffered 152.

Second, individuals may obtain compensation for damages before Andorran courts. This first
of all includes the possibility to claim compensation for violations of the Data Protection Act
committed by criminal law enforcement authorities 153. More generally, individuals may apply
for compensation of damages caused by an unlawful interference with the right to privacy,
honour and reputation, based on Qualified law 30/2014 on the protection of the civil rights to
privacy, honour and reputation 154.

Third, it follows from Article 41 of the Andorran Constitution that the protection of
fundamental rights and public freedoms of individuals, including data protection and privacy
rights, is ensured in ordinary courts through an urgent and preferential procedure established
by law which, in all cases, shall include two courts. Any action that has violated an individual
right can be challenged through these proceedings, including court orders. Applicants must
file a lawsuit in writing, signed by a lawyer duly registered to exercise in Andorra, outlining
their request and the alleged damage. The case can be brought before the judge at any time,
without mandatory deadlines or other requirements. Possible remedies can be a cessation of


148
    Article 22(2) Law on the creation and functioning of the Ombudsman.
149
    Third final provision, paragraph 3, of the Data Protection Act.
150
    Third final provision, paragraph 4, of the Data Protection Act.
151
    Article 126bis Code of Administration. Any person who considers himself harmed by an act or a resolution of
the Administration may file an administrative appeal (Article 124(1) Code of Administration). The deadline for
filing an administrative appeal is one month from the date of notification of the act subject to appeal, except
when a different deadline is established by law (Article 124(3) Code of Administration). The resolution of the
appeal must decide on all the issues raised, even if they have not been alleged by the interested parties; in the
latter case, they must be given a preliminary hearing procedure for a period of ten working days. However, the
resolution must be consistent with the requests made by the person making the appeal, who cannot see their
situation worsen as a result of the appeal. See Article 125 Code of Administration.
152
    Articles 58 and 59 Code of Administration.
153
    Article 71(2) and (7) Data Protection Act. Legal actions in the exercise of the right to compensation must be
brought before the courts within a period of one year from the date of the firm declaration of liability of the
person responsible or in charge of the processing, see Article 71(6) Data Protection Act.
154
    See Article 20-25 of the Act. An “illegitimate interference” is defined as an act that breaches the core of these
rights and which cannot be justified on one of the grounds specified in the Act, see Article 4 of the Act. The
Andorran authorities have explained that the available remedies are, after the declaration, cessation and
compensation for the damage caused.

                                                         20
the offending action, the annulation of the effects that have occurred, the issuance of a
rectification order and/or the fixation of an indemnity.

In addition, sentences and orders that violate constitutional rights, including the right to
privacy, honor and reputation and the inviolability of the home and the confidentiality of
communication, can be challenged before the Constitutional Court through the exceptional
judicial remedy of ‘empara’ 155. An appeal for empara can be filed against rulings dismissing
claims brought under the urgent and preferential procedure 156. The empara appeal must be
filed within thirteen business days following the day on which the contested ruling is
delivered. Through it, the appellant requests the annulment of the ruling, and, if necessary, the
suspension of its effects. If the appeal is upheld, the Constitutional Court will annul the
contested ruling and all its effects, declare an infringement of a constitutional right, reinstate
the appellant in the fulness of his right and adopt the necessary measures to this end, if
necessary. If the violation is materially irreparable 157, the Constitutional Court determines the
type of liability incurred by the public authority who violated the appellant’s right so that
compensation can be claimed before the ordinary courts.

Finally, any individual may obtain judicial redress before the European Court of Human
Rights against the unlawful collection of his/her data by Andorran criminal law enforcement
authorities, provided that all available domestic remedies have been exhausted.




155
    See Articles 85-96 Qualified Law on the Constitutional Court.
156
    It can also be filed against rulings issued by the High Court of Justice.
157
    Meaning that it has caused damage that cannot be quantified in monetary terms.

                                                      21
                                   II. REPUBLIC OF ARGENTINA

1. RULES APPLYING TO THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA

    1.1. Relevant developments in the data protection framework of Argentina

The Commission adopted the adequacy decision for Argentina on 30 June 2003 158, after
having received the opinion of the Article 29 Working Party on 3 October 2002 159. The
decision finds that, for the purposes of Article 25(2) of Directive 95/46/EC (Data Protection
Directive) 160, Argentina provides an adequate level of protection for personal data transferred
from the EU.

In Argentina, core data protection rights are recognised by the so-called ‘habeas data action’
that was incorporated into the Argentinian Federal Constitution in 1994 161 and that is also part
of thirteen provincial constitutions 162. The recognition of these rights created the basis for the
protection of the right to privacy 163, and served as a foundation for Law 25.326 on Personal
Data Protection of 4 October 2000 (Ley de Protección de Datos Personales, LPDP) and
Regulation of Law 25.326 approved by Decree No. 1558/2001 (LPDP Regulation).

The LPDP sets out the general data protection principles, the rights of data subjects, the
obligations of data controllers and data users, the set-up, tasks and powers of the supervisory
authority, sanctions, and rules of procedure in seeking ‘habeas data’ as a judicial remedy. The
LPDP Regulation introduces implementing provisions and further clarifies specific aspects of
the LPDP.




158
    Commission Decision 2003/490/EC of 30 June 2003 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the adequate protection of personal data in Argentina, OJ L 168, 5.7.2003, p.
19, available at: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32003D0490.
159
     Opinion 4/2002 on the level of protection of personal data in Argentina (WP63), available at:
https://ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2002/wp63_en.pdf.
160
    Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data.
161
    Article 43(3) of the Argentinian Federal Constitution provides that “Any person shall file a prompt and
summary proceeding regarding constitutional guarantees, provided there is no other legal remedy, against any
act or omission of the public authorities or individuals which currently or imminently may damage, limit, modify
or threaten rights and guarantees recognised by this Constitution, treaties or laws, with open arbitrariness or
illegality. […] Any person shall file this action to obtain information on the data about himself and their purpose,
registered in public records or data bases, or in private ones intended to supply information; and in case of false
data or discrimination, this action may be filed to request the suppression, rectification, confidentiality or
updating of said data. The secret nature of the sources of journalistic information shall not be impaired”.
162
    Constitution of the Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Article 16; Constitution of the Provincia de Buenos
Aires, Article 20 (3); Constitution of the Provincia del Chaco, Article 19; Constitution of the Provincia del
Chubut, Article 56; Constitution of the Provincia de Córdoba, Article 50; Constitution of the Provincia de Entre
Ríos, Article 63; Constitution of the Provincia de Jujuy, Article 19 incs. 6 and 8; Constitution of the Provincia de
Neuquén, Article 61; Constitution of the Provincia de Santiago del Estero, Article 60; Constitution of the
Provincia de La Rioja, Article 30; Constitution of the Provincia de Río Negro, Article 20; Constitution of the
Provincia de Salta, Article 89; Constitution of the Provincia de Tierra del Fuego, Antártida e Islas del Atlántico
Sur, Article 45. The provincial constitutions and the one of the Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires are available
at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/constituciones/provinciales-y-caba.
163
    The rights protected by the Constitution apply equally to foreigners (such as EU citizens). Article 20 of the
Constitution establishes that “foreigners enjoy in the territory of the Nation all the civil rights of a citizen”.
Article 16 of the Constitution states that “the Nation of Argentina does not allow prerogatives of blood or birth”.

                                                        22
Both the LPDP and the LPDP Regulation were already in place when the adequacy decision
was adopted and continue to apply 164. However, as will be explained in more detail below,
several elements of the Argentinian data protection system have been modernised and further
reinforced since the adoption of the adequacy decision.

In particular, in a reform that has significantly strengthened the independence of the
Argentinian data protection supervisory authority, the Agencia de Acceso a la Información
Pública (AAIP) has been entrusted with overseeing compliance with the LPDP. Moreover,
the AAIP has issued a number of binding regulations and opinions which clarify how the data
protection framework is to be interpreted and applied in practice, thus helping to keep the
LPDP up to date. Through these regulations/opinions, the AAIP (1) clarified the LPDP’s
material scope of application by setting out requirements for ‘data dissociation’ (i.e.,
anonymisation), (2) expanded the notion of sensitive data, (3) strengthened data protection
principles (limited data retention, data security, accountability), rights (right to erasure, right
to withdraw data or block data processing) and obligations (additional safeguards required for
automated decision-making, restrictions on international transfers). Furthermore, new case
law of the Supreme Court has clarified the territorial scope of application of the LPDP.

Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, Argentina also strengthened its international
commitments in the field of data protection. In 2019, it joined the Council of Europe
Convention for the protection of individuals with regard to the automatic processing of
personal data and its additional Protocol (Convention 108) 165. In 2023, Argentina also ratified
the amending Protocol creating the modernised Convention 108+ 166.

While the abovementioned developments in terms of guidance, interpretation and case law
contribute to an increased level of data protection in Argentina, codifying these developments
in legislation would be important to enhance legal certainty and solidify the protection for
personal data. The ongoing debate on a reform of the LPDP – in which the AAIP recently
concluded a public consultation on a draft Data Protection Bill that is now slated to be
submitted to Congress 167 – seems to offer such an opportunity.

As regards the LPDP, it has a broad personal and material scope of application, applying to
both private operators and public authorities 168. While the definitions of ‘personal data’169,

164
    Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, the LPDP has been amended by Law 26.343 of 2008, available
at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/ley-26343-136483/texto and the LPDP Regulation has been
amended         by      Decree      No.       1160/2010,          available    at       the    following      link:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/decreto-1160-2010-170508/texto. These amendments have
added new rules to the LPDP on the processing of credit information (Law 26.343) and have clarified and
simplified the procedure for the enforcement of the LPDP and the LPDP Regulation (Decree No. 1160/2010).
165
       See     the    Chart     of  signatures      and     ratifications   of    Treaty    108,    available    at:
https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list?module=signatures-by-treaty&treatynum=108.
166
       See     the    Chart     of  signatures      and     ratifications   of    Treaty    223,    available    at:
https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list?module=signatures-by-treaty&treatynum=223.
167
           See       information        about         the        public       consultation       available       at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/informe_consulta_publica_aaip.pdf. The draft Data Protection
Bill                        itself                       is                       available                      at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/proyecto_de_ley_de_datos_personales_aaip.pdf
168
    In accordance with Article 1, the LPDP covers the processing of personal data contained in “files, records,
databases, databanks or other technical means of data treatment, either public or private for purposes of
providing reports, in order to guarantee the right of individuals to their honor and privacy”. This provision has a
broad interpretation, covering processing by both private entities and public authorities. As explained in Opinion

                                                        23
’controller’ and ‘processor’ 170, ‘data owner’ (data subject) and ‘data treatment’
(processing) 171 in the LPDP have not changed since the adoption of the adequacy decision,
the AAIP has, through guidance, further clarified the notion of ‘data dissociation’ in Article 2
LPDP. This notion is akin to the concept of anonymisation used in Regulation (EU) 2016/679
(GDPR) 172 and refers to the processing of personal data in such a way that the information
can no longer be associated with a particular person. The AAIP clarified in its Resolution No.
4/2019 that the data is dissociated from the data subject when the process necessary to re-
identify the individual would require disproportionate or unviable means. Moreover, the
process should be difficult to perform not only for the data controller, but also for third
parties 173. The AAIP thus relies on factors that are similar to those taken into account under
the GDPR to assess whether information can be considered anonymous 174.

In addition, the scope of application of the LPDP has been clarified with respect to
journalistic information sources and databases 175. The Argentinian Supreme Court 176 and the
AAIP 177 established a distinction between investigative activities and other processing
activities of media and journalists. On the one hand, to protect the freedom of the press and
the secrecy of sources, personal data used to ensure the truthfulness of investigative
information does not fall under the LPDP. On the other hand, when media and journalists act
as data controllers, for example when displaying advertising on a website, the LPDP does
apply to these specific processing activities.




4/2002 of the Article 29 Working Party, this broad interpretation follows from the wording of Article 43 of the
Constitution, Article 24 LPDP, Article 1 of the Regulation and case-law.
169
    Personal data is defined in Article 2 LPDP as any type of information relating to identified or identifiable
(determinadas o determinables – translated in English as “certain or ascertainable”) physical persons or legal
entities.
170
    It follows from Article 25 LPDP and Article 25 of the Regulation that data controllers are those that process
data at their own discretion, while data processors are those who process data following the data controller's
instructions.
171
    Processing (“data treatment”) is defined by Article 2 LPDP as any “systematic operations and procedures,
either electronic or otherwise, that enable the collection, preservation, organisation, storage, modification,
relation, evaluation, blocking, destruction, and in general, the processing of personal information, as well as its
communication to third parties through reports, inquiries, interconnections or transfers”.
172
    Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).
173
        Resolution     No.   4/2019      (RESOL-2019-4-APN-AAIP)            and    its   annex,     available    at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/resolucion-4-2019-318874/texto.
174
    See recital 26 of the GDPR.
175
    According to Article 1 LPDP, journalistic information sources and databases are excluded from the scope of
application of the LPDP. Law 26.522 on Audio-visual Communication Services specifically regulates the media
and journalistic sector.
176
    The Argentinian Supreme Court addressed the relationship between the right to privacy and data protection
and the freedom of the press and the right of information in several instances, such as in M., C. S. c/ Editorial
Perfil S.A. y otros s/ Daños y Perjuicios (on the right to be forgotten), R., M. B. c/ Google Inc. s/ Daños y
Perjuicios (2014 - R.522.XLIX- CSJN) and B., I. c/ Editorial Atlántida S.A. s/ Daños y Perjuicios. In these cases,
the Supreme Court established that the right to privacy as a constitutional right is not absolute and must be
weighed against other interests, such as the right of information of others and the freedom of the press, on a case-
by-case basis.
177
         Resolution     No.    RESOL-2020-124-APN-AAIP             of     2     June     2020,     available     at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/resolucion_redacted.pdf.

                                                        24
As regards its territorial scope of application, the LPDP distinguishes between provisions that
are of general application across the country and those that are not 178. In accordance with
Article 44, the provisions of the LPDP included in Chapters I (General Provisions), II
(General data protection principles), III (Data subjects rights), IV (Data controllers and
processors of files, registers and databanks) and in Article 32 (Criminal sanctions) are of
public order and of general application whenever personal data is processed in the territory of
Argentina. Furthermore, Articles 36 and 44 LPDP provide that “registers, data files, databases
or data banks which are interconnected through networks at inter-jurisdictional (meaning
‘interprovincial’), national or international level” fall within federal jurisdiction and are thus
subject to the provisions of the law, including those set out in Chapter V, VI and VII on the
supervisory authority, the sanctions which may be imposed by the supervisory authority and
the specific habeas data procedure that applies to such registers, data files, databases or data
banks 179.

Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, several Argentinian courts as well as the
Supreme Court have further clarified the interpretation of the notion of “interconnected
networks” and thus the scope of application of Chapters V to VII of the LPDP. The judgments
clarified in particular that data which is transmitted via the Internet or by any other technical
means and can (theoretically) be accessed from all over the country or all over the world is
captured by that notion and therefore subject to the provisions of Chapters V to VII of the
LPDP, including the competence of the AAIP and the federal judges 180. On the basis of the
case law, data transferred from the EU to Argentina is thus captured by the scope of the entire
LPDP, including the provisions regarding the supervisory authority, the applicable sanctions
and the habeas data action, as such data is typically transmitted in electronic format via the
internet or by other technical means and held in databases that can be accessed via
interconnected networks.

The main data protection principles and obligations that were already provided by the LPDP
at the time of the adoption of the adequacy decision have remained in place without
substantial changes. This is the case for the principles of lawfulness and fairness 181, purpose
limitation 182, data accuracy 183, data minimisation 184 and transparency 185. At the same time, a

178
    Argentina is a Federal State that comprises 23 provinces plus a federal district (Autonomous city of Buenos
Aires).
179
    See recital 12 of the adequacy decision.
180
    See for instance Judgement of the Supreme Court of Justice in case Svatzky, Betina Lauras c/ Datos Virtuales
S.A (2005); Judgement of the Cámara Nacional de Apelaciones en lo Civil y Comercial Federal in case
Scigliano Francisco Vicente c/ Veraz S.A. y otro s/ habeas data (2008); Judgement of the Cámara Nacional de
Apelaciones en lo Civil in case Adriao, Alejandro s/ información sumaria s/ competencia (2009) and Judgement
of the Supreme Court of Justice in case Ahumada Carlos Agustín C/Google Inc. S/Medidas Precautorias of 27
August 2013. More specifically, the Court in case Svatzky, Betina Lauras c/ Datos Virtuales S.A (2005) noted
that in the context of the exercise of the habeas data right to obtain the correction of inaccurate data, both Article
36 and Article 44 of the LPDP subject registers, files, databases or databanks interconnected in inter-
jurisdictional, national or international networks to federal jurisdiction. It argued that the Internet was considered
an interconnected network within the meaning of these Articles, and that if the information to be deleted was
accessible via the Internet, federal judges with civil and commercial jurisdiction should intervene in the dispute.
The                          case                        is                        available                        at:
https://sjconsulta.csjn.gov.ar/sjconsulta/documentos/verDocumentoSumario.html?idDocumentoSumario=11617.
181
    Article 5 LPDP.
182
    Article 4(3) LPDP.
183
    Article 4(4) and 4(5) LPDP.
184
    Article 4(1) LPDP.

                                                          25
number of principles and obligations have been further strengthened, in particular through
guidance issued by the AAIP. This concerns notably the principles of limited data retention,
data security, additional safeguards required for certain types of processing (processing of
sensitive data, automated decision-making) and the principle of accountability.

More specifically, the AAIP has further clarified the notion of “suppression” which is relevant
in the context of the principle of limited data retention. This principle is enshrined in Article
4(7) of the LPDP, which states that “data shall be destroyed once it has ceased to be necessary
or relevant to the purposes for which it has been collected.” This provision is supplemented
by Article 4 of the LPDP Regulation, stating that if the data is not required anymore for the
purposes for which it was obtained or collected, it has to be supressed without a need for the
data subject to request such a suppression. According to the AAIP’s Resolution No. 47/2018
on Recommended Security Measures, to suppress data means to “eliminate or destroy
personal data in a definitive way” 186.

Through the same resolution, the AAIP has also strengthened the principle of data security.
First, similarly to the GDPR, the AAIP has reinforced the principles of proactive
responsibility and accountability. In particular, it now recommends that organisations are able
to demonstrate the appropriateness and effectiveness of the technical and organisational
measures used to guarantee the security and confidentiality of the personal data they process.
Moreover, the AAIP has issued guidance on how to handle security incidents, recommending
that controllers (1) establish internal procedures for dealing with security incidents (2)
document security incidents (e.g., the category/ies of affected personal data, the affected users
and the measures taken to mitigate the incident and avoid future incidents) and (3) notify the
AAIP upon a security incident 187.

The AAIP has not only introduced the concept of accountability, but it has also issued
concrete recommendations to operationalise that principle. In Disposition No. 18/2015 it
provides privacy best practices for the development of applications, recommending taking
into consideration principles like privacy by design and privacy by default 188. Second, in
Resolution No. 40/2018 it approved a model data protection policy for public bodies that
recommends the designation of a permanent data protection officer 189. Finally, Resolution No.
47/2018 recommends security measures for the processing and storage of personal data that
include the implementation of review processes to identify, assess and correct possible
vulnerabilities in information systems processing personal data 190.



185
    Article 6 LPDP.
186
     See Resolution No. 47/2018 (RESOL-2018-47-APN-AAIP), Annex I, paragraph F, available at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/resoluci%C3%B3n-47-2018-312662/texto. This part of the
resolution at the same time contains important guidance on data retention, as it establishes technical criteria for
the implementation of procedures to eliminate data (Annex I, paragraph F).
187
           Resolution       No.        47/2018        (RESOL-2018-47-APN-AAIP),                available        at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/resoluci%C3%B3n-47-2018-312662.
188
    Disposition No. 18/2015, available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/disposici%C3%B3n-
18-2015-245973.
189
           Resolution       No.        40/2018        (RESOL-2018-40-APN-AAIP),                available        at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/resolución-40-2018-312130.
190
           Resolution       No.        47/2018        (RESOL-2018-47-APN-AAIP),                available        at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/resoluci%C3%B3n-47-2018-312662.

                                                        26
In addition to the strengthening of data protection principles and obligations, the protections
for special categories of data have been reinforced since the adoption of the adequacy
decision. The LPDP defines special categories of personal data as “revealing racial or ethnic
origin, political opinions, religious, philosophical or moral beliefs, labour union membership
and information concerning health conditions or sexual habits or behaviours” 191.

Recognising that more modern data protection legislation includes biometric and genetic data
in the definition of sensitive data in order to reflect new forms of processing that have
emerged in the context of technological transformations, the AAIP has issued guidance on the
interpretation of the notion of sensitive data with respect to those categories 192.

In Resolution 4/2019, the AAIP provides guidance on the notion of sensitive data with regard
to biometric data 193. Biometric data is defined by the AAIP in the same way as in the
GDPR 194. Moreover, the AAIP clarifies that it considers biometric data as sensitive data
where it can reveal information the use of which could be potentially discriminatory for the
data subject (e.g., data revealing ethnic origin or health-related information) 195.

With respect to genetic data, which is again defined in the same way as in the GDPR 196, the
AAIP clarifies that genetic data is considered sensitive data when it uniquely identifies a
natural person and where it reveals information or information may be deduced from it which
is related to the health or physiology of the data subject and the use of which may be
potentially discriminatory for the data subject 197.

It is also worth noting that Argentina has ratified Convention 108+ that requires to treat
genetic and biometric data uniquely identifying a person as special categories of data 198.




191
    Article 2 LPDP.
192
    See the explanatory memorandum to Resolution No. 255/2022 (RESOL-2022-255-APN-AAIP), available at:
https://www.boletinoficial.gob.ar/detalleAviso/primera/277889/20221216.
193
       Resolution     No.     4/2019      (RESOL-2019-4-APN-AAIP)          and     its    annex,    available       at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/resolucion-4-2019-318874/texto.
194
    Biometric data are defined as “those personal data obtained from specific technical processing, relating to the
physical, physiological or behavioural characteristics of a human person, which allow or confirm his or her
unique identification”. See the Annex to Resolution 4/2019, under ‘Criterion 4. Biometric data’.
195
    See the Annex to Resolution 4/2019, under ‘Criterion 4. Biometric data’. The approach adopted by the AAIP
in Resolution 4/2019 with regard to biometric data was, prior to the adoption of that resolution, already applied
by the Agency in its advisory role. See for example Notice NO-2018-10433281-APN-AAIP of 9 March 2018;
Notice NO-2018-38238124-APN-AAIP of 8 August 2018; Notice NO-2017-30610745-APN-AAIP of 30
November 2017. In particular, in Notice NO-2018-38238124-APN-AAIP, the AAIP considered facial
recognition data as biometric data the use of which could be potentially discriminatory for the data subject, and
which is therefore sensitive.
196
    Pursuant to Article 2 of Resolution 255/202, genetic data is defined as “data relating to the genetic
characteristics inherited or acquired from a human person which provides information on their physiology or
health”.
197
           Resolution        No.        255/2022          (RESOL-2022-255-APN-AAIP),             available          at:
https://www.boletinoficial.gob.ar/detalleAviso/primera/277889/20221216. Moreover, the Resolution explicitly
states that when genetic data are considered to be sensitive, higher levels of security, confidentiality, restrictions
on access, use and circulation of such data must be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Article 9
LPDP and Resolution No. 47/2018. These higher levels of protection apply in addition to the stricter conditions
for the processing of sensitive data set out in Article 7 LPDP.
198
    Article 6 of Convention 108+.

                                                          27
Therefore, the same categories of sensitive data that are considered sensitive under the GDPR
benefit from additional protections in Argentina 199.

Furthermore, developments in case law, in combination with guidance from the AAIP, have
led to a reinforcement and clarification of data subject rights under the LPDP. Importantly, in
the case Rodriguez, Maria Belén c/ Google of 2014 the Argentinian Supreme Court created a
right to erasure (‘right to be forgotten’) that is similar to the one provided by the GDPR200.
The Supreme Court required a search engine provider to de-index certain results, further to a
careful balancing of the public interest in the information and the right to data protection in
the concrete circumstances of the case. The AAIP recently clarified through guidance how
this balancing of rights should be performed 201. Moreover, in its decision Google Inc. c/
Disposición DNODO No. 3/2011 s/Proceso de Conocimiento, of 2011 202, the AAIP
confirmed that not only courts, but also the AAIP itself has the power to enforce the right to
be forgotten. Basing itself on the Argentinian Supreme Court’s Rodríguez, María Belén c/
Google judgment and taking into consideration the CJEU’s judgement in Google Spain (C-
131/12), the AAIP ordered the de-indexation of certain search results.

In addition, while the LPDP does not explicitly contain a right to object, the AAIP interpreted
Article 27 LPDP – which provides for a “right to withdraw [data] or block [data processing]”
– to contain a right to object in relation to data processing for marketing purposes. More
specifically, in Disposition No. 4/2009, the AAIP required that all direct marketing messages
must contain express information on the possibility of withdrawal and blocking, as well as a
mechanism to exercise those rights 203.

Finally, even though the LPDP does not contain a right not to be subjected to automated
decision-making for the private sector 204, the AAIP’s interpretation of the provisions on
access to data has created one in practice 205. Taking into account the current reality that most
data processing is carried out in automated forms, the AAIP considered that on the basis of


199
    According to Article 7 LPDP, no person may be compelled to provide sensitive data. Sensitive data may only
be collected and processed when there are reasons of general interest authorized by law. They may also be
processed for statistical or scientific purposes when data subjects cannot be identified. The LPDP prohibits the
creation of files, databanks or registers storing information that directly or indirectly reveals sensitive data, with
the exception of the registers of members of the Catholic Church, religious associations and political and trade
union organisations managed by such institutions. Finally, Article 7 LPDP establishes that data relating to
criminal records may only be processed by the competent public authorities, within the framework of the
respective laws and regulations.
200
    Judgement of the Supreme Court of Justice Rodriguez María Belén c/ Google Inc. s/ daños y perjuicios of 28
October                                 2014,                               available                              at:
https://jurisprudencia.mpd.gov.ar/Jurisprudencia/Rodriguez,%20Mar%C3%ADa%20Bel%C3%A9n%20c.%20G
oogle%20Inc.%20s.%20da%C3%B1os%20y%20perjuicios.pdf.
201
    Resolution No. 48/2018, available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/resoluci%C3%B3n-
48-2018-312829.
202
    Not published. The Argentinian authorities have provided the Commission services with a redacted copy of
the decision.
203
    Disposition No. 4/2009, available at: https://leyesargentinas.com/norma/151221/disposicion-4-proteccion-de-
datos-personales-opcion-para-el-ejercicio-del-derecho-de-retiro-o-bloqueo-ley-n-25-326.
204
    Article 20 LPDP sets out a right not to be subject to automated decision-making and profiling. However, the
scope of this right is limited to judicial decisions and administrative acts involving an appreciation or assessment
of human behaviour. In essence, such decisions and acts may not have as their only basis the result of a
computerised processing of personal data defining the profile or personality of the data subject, otherwise they
would be void.
205
    Article 15 LPDP.

                                                         28
the transparency principle, which requires controllers to provide clear information about the
processing, the controller has to provide an explanation about the logic and specific reasons
underlying decisions made exclusively on the basis of automated processing 206. Furthermore,
it is worth noting that Argentina has ratified Convention 108+, which explicitly includes the
right not to be subject to decisions based solely on automated processing.

As regards restrictions on international transfers 207, the rules in Argentina have evolved since
the adoption of the adequacy decision, increasing the level of protection in case of onward
transfers of data originally transferred from the EU. In particular, the AAIP has adopted an
approach to international transfers that is similar to the one of the EU.

First, as regards adequacy, the LPDP grants the AAIP the power to adopt adequacy
decisions 208. It currently considers as adequate only countries that have been recognised as
providing an adequate level of protection by the European Commission 209, as well as all
EU/EEA Member States 210. Second, in recent years the AAIP has developed several
compliance instruments for international transfers to non-adequate countries and
organisations. These are essentially the same mechanisms that are recognised by the GDPR:
Binding Corporate Rules 211, Standard Contractual Clauses 212 and ad hoc clauses/contracts 213.
Finally, the AAIP has clarified the scope of the exceptions to the general prohibition of
transfers to countries or international organisations which do not provide adequate levels of


206
           Resolution          No.         4/2019          (RESOL-2019-4-APN-AAIP),             available         at:
http://servicios.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInterneRijnt/anexos/315000-319999/318874/res4AAIP.pdf.
207
    Article 12 LPDP prohibits transfers of personal data to countries and organisations that do not provide an
adequate level of protection. Article 12 of Decree No. 1558/2001 establishes the criteria to be taken into account
when assessing the level of protection: “The adequacy of the level of protection afforded by a country or
international body shall be assessed in the light of all the circumstances surrounding a transfer or a category of
data transfers; in particular, account shall be taken of the nature of the data, the purpose and duration of the
processing or the processing envisaged, the place of final destination, the rules of law, general or sectoral, in
force in the country concerned, as well as the professional rules, codes of conduct and security measures in force
in those places, or which apply to international or supranational bodies. It is understood that a State or
international body provides an adequate level of protection where such protection derives directly from the legal
system in force, or from self-regulatory systems, or from the protection established by contractual clauses
providing for the protection of personal data”.
208
    Article 12 of Decree No. 1558/2001 provides that the AAIP has the authority to assess the level of protection
in a foreign country or organisation. It can do so ex officio or upon request by an interested party, including the
executive.
209
    Argentina considers as adequate the EU/EEA Member States and all countries or territories that benefit from
an adequacy finding by the European Commission, except for Japan and South Korea.
210
           Resolution         No.         34/2019         (RESOL-2019-34-APN-AAIP),              available        at:
https://www.boletinoficial.gob.ar/detalleAviso/primera/202373/20190226.
211
           Resolution        No.         159/2018        (RESOL-2018-159-APN-AAIP),              available        at:
http://servicios.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/315000-319999/317228/norma.htm.           The      Resolution
provides guidance on the content of BCRs and stipulates that even if those BCRs do not always need to be pre-
approved, they must always follow the principles of the LPDP.
212
    Argentinian standard contractual clauses are largely similar in terms of structure and substance to the standard
contractual clauses adopted by the European Commission under the former Data Protection Directive, and are set
out       by      the     AAIP        in      Disposition     No.      60       -     E/2016,      available      at:
http://servicios.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/265000-269999/267922/norma.htm. In addition, through
Resolution No. 198/2023 published in the Official Gazette on 18 October 2023, the AAIP approved the model
contractual clauses for international transfers included in the ‘Guide to Implementation of Model Contractual
Clauses for the International Transfer of Personal Data (TIDP)’ of the Ibero-American Network for Personal
Data Protection.
213
    According to Disposition No. 60 - E/2016 (see footnote above), it is possible to create ad hoc clauses but only
with regulatory approval requested within 30 calendar days of their execution.

                                                         29
protection, set out in Article 12(2) LPDP 214. The AAIP now explicitly considers that
exceptions to the abovementioned requirements must be interpreted restrictively, and that
falling within one of these exceptions is not sufficient to provide a legal basis for transfers; all
the data protection principles, obligations and rights of the LPDP must be complied with at all
times 215.

      1.2. Oversight, enforcement and redress

Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, core elements of the Argentinian system for the
monitoring and enforcing of the data protection rules have been strengthened. First, in a
reform that has significantly strengthened the independence of the supervisory authority, the
AAIP has been charged with monitoring and enforcing the LPDP 216. Second, the AAIP has
adopted two new resolutions that substantially increase the maximum level of fines the
Agency may impose. These changes are described in more detail below.

The LPDP provides that ‘the controlling Agency’ shall ensure compliance with its provisions.
At the time of the adoption of the adequacy decision, the Dirección Nacional de Protección
de Datos Personales (DNPDP) of the Ministry of Human Rights was designated as such.
With a view to strengthening the independence of the controlling Agency, the AAIP in 2017
replaced the DNPDP as the supervisory authority for the LPDP. The AAIP was originally
created in 2016 as the independent supervisory authority for Law No. 27.275 on Access to
Public Information 217. In 2017, Decree No. 746/2017 expanded its oversight mandate by
granting the AAIP additional responsibilities for overseeing compliance with the LPDP 218 and
with Law No. 26.951 on the creation of the Do-Not-Call-Register (Registro Nacional No
Llame) 219.


214
    These are: (1) international judicial cooperation; (2) exchange of medical information, when so required for
the treatment of the individual affected, or in case of an epidemiological investigation, as long as the data
undergoes a “dissociation” procedure, similar to pseudonymisation; (3) stock exchange or banking transfers in
pursuance of the applicable laws; (4) transfers arranged within the framework of international treaties to which
Argentina is a signatory; (5) transfers made for international cooperation purposes between intelligence agencies
in the fight against organised crime, terrorism and drug-trafficking. In any case, in all the instances falling under
these exceptions, all the requirements and safeguards of LPDP must be complied with by all the controllers and
processors performing the transfer. Specific rules on transfers without consent are contained in Decree No.
1588/01.
215
    For example, the authority considered the legality of an information-sharing agreement relating to foreign
trade transactions between the tax authorities of Argentina and Japan. In its Notice IF-2019-04875826-APN-
AAIP, the authority established that, although the transfer in question could fall within the exception provided
for in Article 12(2)(d), it was also necessary to analyse the content of the agreement in order to determine
whether it complied with the principles laid down by Law No 25.326.
216
    See Article 29 LPDP Regulation.
217
    Available at: http://servicios.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/265000-269999/265949/texact.htm.
218
    Decree No. 746/2017 established in this regard that the agency has the duty of supervising the integral
protection of personal data in order to guarantee the rights of individuals to honor and privacy, as well as their
right     to     access      their     personal     data.    Decree     No.    746/2017        is    available     at:
http://servicios.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/275000-279999/279940/norma.htm. Later on, Decree No.
899/2017 modified Decree No. 1558/2001 accordingly and stipulated that the AAIP is the supervisory body for
the     LPDP,       therefore      replacing     the     DNPDP.      Decree    899/2017        is    available     at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/decreto-899-2017-285903/texto
219
     Available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/ley-26951-233066/actualizacion. This law
(also referred to as Do-Not-Call-Law) allows data subjects to block telephone contacts from companies
advertising, selling or giving away products and services The law thus implements, within the context of
telephony services, the right to block contact from companies advertising, selling or giving away products and
services as laid down in Article 27(3) LPDP and Article 27 of the LPDP Regulation.

                                                         30
Other than the former DNPDP, the AAIP benefits from a number of institutional and
procedural safeguards for its independence 220. First, Law No. 27.275 on Access to Public
information expressly stipulates that the AAIP is set up as an independent entity with
functional autonomy within the President’s Chief of Staff Office 221. Second, as a result of the
reform, the system for the designation of the head of the supervisory authority has been
reinforced 222. While the Director of the AAIP is appointed by the Executive (the President of
Argentina) for a five-year term that is renewable once 223, (s)he must be selected through an
open and transparent public selection process with a public hearing 224. This new process has
led to increased scrutiny of candidates for the function of Director of the AAIP, as illustrated
by the procedure that has recently been followed for the selection of a new Director 225. The
law furthermore requires that the Director may not have any interest in, or links to, matters
under his or her own right under the conditions laid down in Law No. 25.188 on Ethics in the
Exercise of the Civil Service, and (s)he may not have held an elected or advocate position in
the last five years prior to the appointment 226. In addition, the position of Director is deemed
incompatible with any other public or private activity other than part-time teaching 227. Third,
the Director may only be removed by the Executive in agreement with Congress, and only for
specific reasons that are listed exhaustively in the law, notably misconduct, criminal offences
in the performance of their duties or for common crimes 228. Finally, the AAIP has its own
budget granted under the National Budget Law.

In terms of powers, the LPDP continues to provide that the AAIP may impose sanctions
consisting of warnings, suspensions, fines ranging between one thousand pesos ($1 000) and
one hundred thousand pesos ($100 000), or the closure or cancellation of the file, register or
data base 229. The use of these powers is regulated by resolutions of the AAIP as the
controlling Agency that “shall determine the conditions and procedures for the application of
the abovementioned sanctions, which shall be graded in proportion to the seriousness and


220
    In its opinion on the draft adequacy decision, the Article 29 Working Party had pointed out that the former
DNPDP was part of the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights and that its head was nominated and could be
dismissed by the Minister of Justice and Human Rights. It considered that “this situation does not guarantee that
the authority may act in complete independence” and urged that “the necessary elements for that purpose be put
in place, including changed modalities for appointment and dismissal of the head of the authority”. See Opinion
4/2002 on the level of protection of personal data in Argentina, p. 14.
221
    Article 19 Law No. 27.275.
222
    The AAIP is composed of a director, assisted by technical and administrative staff. Decisions of the AAIP are
taken by its director. See Articles 20, 22 and 25 of Law No. 27.275.
223
    Article 20 Law No. 27.275.
224
    Article 20 and 21 Law No. 27.225.
225
    As described in the AAIP’s annual report of 2020, the now former Director of the AAIP resigned with effect
from 1 January 2021 without having yet appointed his replacement. The government subsequently made a
proposal for his replacement but had to withdraw its candidate because it faced congressional objections relating
to the candidate’s qualifications for the position. A second candidate had to be proposed, who was recently
appointed.      See    the    press    release    published   on     the    AAIP’s      website,    available    at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/noticias/beatriz-de-anchorena-asumio-como-nueva-directora-de-la-agencia-de-
acceso-la-informacion-0.
226
    Article 23 Law No. 27.225.
227
    Article 23 Law No. 27.225.
228
    Article 27 Law No. 27.225.
229
    Article 31(1) LDPD. The closure or cancellation of databases implies the prohibition to continue the activities
of data processing until the AAIP lifts such sanction. Eventually this could require the erasure of the database, as
explained by the Argentinian authorities. To enforce the Do-Not-Call-Law, the AAIP may impose the sanctions
that are provided for in the LDPD (e.g., fines).

                                                        31
extent of the violation and the damages arising from such violations, guaranteeing the due
process of law principle” 230.

Importantly, the AAIP in 2022 adopted two new sanctioning resolutions to ensure that the
sanctions provided for in the LPDP maintain an adequate deterrent effect and to further
strengthen the effectiveness of the sanctioning regime as a whole 231. These resolutions, which
replace two earlier resolutions adopted by the AAIP’s predecessor in 2015/16, increase the
level of individual fines that can be imposed for specific categories of infringements and raise
the maximum level of fines that the Agency may apply in case of cumulative sanctions.

More specifically, Resolution 240/2022 adjusts the system for the classification and
graduation of fines 232. Like its predecessor, it divides infringements into those of a ‘minor’,
‘serious’ and ‘very serious nature and provides a non-exhaustive list of examples of each. It
furthermore determines the maximum fine to be applied to infringements falling within each
category. Compared to the previous resolution, the maximum fines for ‘minor’ and ‘serious’
infringements have been raised 233. The resolution also lists the different factors that the AAIP
should take into account when determining the level of the fine to be applied, which are
similar to the factors taken account under the GDPR 234. Resolution 244/2022 then establishes
the maximum level of fines to be applied in case of cumulative fines 235.

With respect to the possibilities for individuals to obtain redress, the Argentinian system
continues to offer various avenues, including the possibility to lodge a complaint with the

230
    Article 31(2) LPDP.
231
    In addition, Article 77 of the draft National Budget Law for the financial year 2024 that was submitted to the
Argentinian Parliament on 15 September 2023 proposes to amend Article 31 of the LDPD on administrative
penalties, providing that fines shall be established on the basis of a mobile unit of account which initial value is
set at ten million pesos ($10 000). The amount of financial penalties is to be graduated between a minimum of
five mobile units and a maximum of one million mobile units. The AAIP shall then, on an annual basis, amend
the value of the mobile unit of account in accordance with the change in the Consumer Prices Index. The draft
National Budget Law is available at: https://www.hcdn.qob.ai7proYectos/provecto.¡sp?exp=0039-JGM-2023.
232
           Resolution        No.         240/2022        (RESOL-2022-240-APN-AAIP),                available       at:
https://www.boletinoficial.gob.ar/detalleAviso/primera/277165/20221205.
233
    The resolution determines that ‘minor’ infringements (e.g.,charging data subjects a fee for the exercise of
their data subject rights) may be sanctioned with a fine up to $80 000 (previously: $25 000), while for serious
infringements (e.g.,a violation of basic data protection principles such as data minimisation, data accuracy,
storage limitation and data security) a fine up to $90 000 (previously: $80 000) may be imposed. For
infringements classified as ‘very serious’ (e.g., a violation of the rules on cross-border transfers of personal data)
a maximum fine of $100 000 applies, in line with the ceiling established in Article 31(1) LPDP.
234
     Factors to be taken into account are for instance the proportionality between the seriousness of the
misconduct and the penalty, the nature and extent of the harm or danger to the affected personal rights, and the
economic benefit obtained by the infringer or third parties.
235
           Resolution        No.         244/2022        (RESOL-2022-244-APN-AAIP),                available       at:
https://www.boletinoficial.gob.ar/detalleAviso/primera/277300/20221206. The resolution raises these maximum
levels across the board, taking into account the changes that have taken place since 2015/16 in the consumer
price indices published by the National Institute of Statistics and Census of the Argentine Republic. It sets the
maximum level of fines to be applied in case of cumulative fines at $3 000 000 (previously: $1 000 000) for
infringements classified as ‘minor’. For infringements classified as ‘serious’ the maximum is set at $10 000 000
(previously: $3 000 000), while for infringements classified as ‘very serious’ a maximum of $15 000 000
(previously: $5 000,000) applies. It follows from Resolution 240/2022 that cumulative fines can be applied when
multiple provisions of the LPDP are violated through one action, or when one infringement affects multiple data
subjects (e.g., in case of a data breach). In the latter case, the maximum limits laid down in the legislation in
force apply. See Annex II to Resolution No. 240/2022, point 7. According to explanations received from the
Argentinian authorities, this refers to the LPDP, together with the Resolutions Nos. 240/2022 and 244/2022,
which means that the maximum level of fines to be applied in this case is set at a maximum of $15 000 000 for
infringements classified as ‘very serious’.

                                                         32
AAIP 236, to make use of the special judicial remedy for the protection of personal data known
as ‘habeas data’, to obtain judicial redress directly against controllers and processors (both
private operators and public authorities) 237 and to obtain compensation for damages 238.

The AAIP plays an active role, both when it comes to its engagement with stakeholders and
exercising its oversight role.

In particular, the AAIP each year handles a number of files pertaining to the LDPD, including
complaints, consultations and ex officio investigations. For example, according to its annual
report, in 2021 the AAIP received 386 complaints concerning possible violations of the
LDPD and conducted eight ex officio investigations 239. In 2020 the AAIP received 239
complaints, dealt with nine written questions and conducted ten ex officio investigations 240. In
2019, the AAIP handled 214 files, including seven ex officio investigations 241.

These supervisory activities have led to enforcement action in multiple cases. In 2021, the
AAIP imposed eleven fines 242. For example, on 31 March 2021 the AAIP fined Rappi Arg
S.A.S, an on-demand delivery mobile app for not responding in due time to a request for the
suppression of the user’s personal data 243. In 2020, according to its annual report, the AAIP
imposed thirteen fines 244. For instance, on 20 April 2020 the AAIP fined Google Argentina
SRL for denying a data subject access to her personal data after her e-mail account was
illegally accessed 245. In 2019, according to its annual report, the Agency imposed eleven
fines 246. For example, on 6 June 2019, Yahoo Argentina SRL was fined in response to a
security incident 247.


236
    Article 29(b) Decree No. 1558/2001.
237
    Articles 33-43 LPDP. The action of “habeas data” can be initiated in case a controller/processor does not
respond in time to a data subject’s request to have access his/her personal data or to have that data rectified or
deleted, see Articles 14(2) and 16(3) LPDP. Article 37 LPDP provides that “the habeas data action shall proceed
in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the procedure corresponding to the ordinary action for the
protection of constitutional rights (Amparo), and subsidiarily in accordance with the provisions of the National
Code of Civil and Commercial Procedure as regards specially expedited summary proceedings”. In addition,
according to information received from the Argentinian authorities, the data subject can request the judge to
make a controller comply with any of the mandatory principles of LPDP, even if he has not filed a complaint
with the AAIP. This type of remedy would be available when the habeas data action is not possible, i.e., when
the action does not concern the exercise of a right of access, rectification or deletion of personal data. In practice,
however, this type of action requesting the enforcement of the law (e.g., the principle of safety) is most often
combined with a claim for damages.
238
    Article 31(1) LPDP.
239
                AAIP              2021              annual                report,            available              at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/2019/02/informe2021_web.pdf.
240
                AAIP              Annual               report              2020,             available              at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/informe2020_web.pdf.
241
                AAIP              Annual               report              2019,             available              at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/informe2019_web.pdf.
242
                AAIP              2021              annual                report,            available              at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/2019/02/informe2021_web.pdf.
243
    Resolution 32/2021, available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/2021/04/resol-2021-32-apn-
dnpdp-aaip_tachas.pdf
244
    AAIP 2020 annual report, available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/informe2020_web.pdf
245
     Resolution 69/2020, available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/rs-2020-25457045-apn-
aaip_google.pdf
246
                AAIP              Annual               report              2019,             available              at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/informe2019_web.pdf.
247
    File Number EX-2016-04629409 – DNPDP#MJ of 6 June 2019 (unpublished).

                                                          33
Besides fines, the AAIP also applies other sanctions to enforce the LPDP (e.g., warnings,
suspension, closure or cancellation of the file, register or database). For example, on 5
February 2020 the Agency issued a warning against the Federal Police in connection with a
data breach, a failure to comply with security protocols and a breach of the duty of
confidentiality 248. When investigating private sector controllers, such non-monetary sanctions
can also be imposed by the AAIP as a prelude to the imposition of a fine. The AAIP has
developed a practice whereby, at the stage of the proceedings where it produces a report on
the violations it has found, it simultaneously requires the controller to implement a
compliance plan. The extent to which the controller implements this plan is subsequently
taken into account when determining the amount of the fine. This approach was for instance
followed in a case where a delivery company was found to have breached the security and
confidentiality obligations of the LPDP 249.

In addition to the administrative sanctions that can be imposed for violations of the LPDP, the
Criminal Code criminalises certain actions involving data processing. Article 117bis of the
Criminal Code makes “knowingly providing false information contained in a personal data
file to a third party” punishable by a prison sentence of six months up to six years. Article
157bis makes certain forms of ‘hacking’ (unduly accessing of a database, revealing or
supplying confidential information recorded in a file, illegitimately inserting data in a file or
database) punishable by a prison sentence of one month up to two years. These crimes are
regularly prosecuted. For example, in 2004 an individual was sentenced based on Article
117bis, 156 and 157bis of the Criminal Code for publishing the user database of an internet
company on his/her website 250. In 2007 a public official was prosecuted for unlawfully
handing over, transferring, copying, or having intervened in the databases of an agency which
contained a list of affiliates of social projects and of unemployed persons 251

Finally, the AAIP has issued a number of binding resolutions and opinions over the years
which have helped to keep the LPDP up to date 252. These opinions and binding resolutions
cover topics ranging from the right of access to personal data collected through closed-circuit
television cameras, automated processing of data, dissociation of data, biometric data, and
consent, including consent of minors (Resolution No. 4/2019) 253, to the processing of personal
data for electoral purposes (Resolution No. 86/2019) 254 and the processing of personal data in
the context of the COVID-19 pandemic (Resolution No. 70/2020) 255.

2. ACCESS TO AND USE OF PERSONAL DATA TRANSFERRED FROM THE
   EUROPEAN UNION BY PUBLIC AUTHORITIES IN ARGENTINA

248
    See Resolution 30/2020, available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/rs-2020-30-apn-aaip.pdf
249
      Resolution 12/2021, available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/resol-2021-12-apn-
dnpdpaaip_tachas.pdf
250
    Ruling of 20/10/2004 of the National Criminal and Correctional Appeals Chamber, Chamber VII (Case of
Feldman Adrian and other).
251
    Ruling of 11/10/2007 of the National Federal Criminal and Correctional Appeals Chamber, Chamber I (Prieto
Manuel E. Case).
252
    See also the Report of the Special Rapporteur on the right to privacy, Joseph A. Cannataci, on Argentina, p. 7.
The report is available at: https://undocs.org/A/HRC/46/37/Add.5.
253
                                                    Available                                                   at:
https://www.boletinoficial.gob.ar/detalleAviso/primera/200224/20190116?msclkid=7b14bc8cc18b11eca181e3d7
765cd330
254
    Available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/resoluci%C3%B3n-86-2019-323901/texto
255
    Available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/resoluci%C3%B3n-70-2020-336329/texto

                                                        34
      2.1. General legal framework

When collecting and (further) processing personal data for criminal law enforcement purposes
in Argentina, public authorities are subject to precise and accessible rules governing the scope
and application of a measure and imposing minimum safeguards. These limitations and
safeguards follow from the overarching constitutional framework and specific laws that
regulate the activities of public authorities in the areas of criminal law enforcement and
national security.

First, several provisions of the Argentinian Constitution guarantee the rights to privacy and
the protection of personal data. Article 18 of the Constitution stipulates that “the domicile
may not be violated, as well as the written correspondence and private papers; and a law shall
determine in which cases and for what reasons their search and occupation shall be allowed”.
Importantly, the Supreme Court has ruled that these protections extend to communications via
the internet 256. Article 19 declares that “the private actions of men which in no way offend
public order or morality, nor injure a third party, are only reserved to God and are exempted
from the authority of judges”. The Supreme Court has interpreted this provision as protecting
“a sphere of individual autonomy including feelings, practices and customs, family relations,
financial situation, religious beliefs, mental and physical health, and, in sum, any actions,
events, or information which, considering the lifestyles accepted by the community, are
reserved for the individual” 257. In addition, Article 43 of the Constitution guarantees the right
to ‘habeas data’, a special remedy which any data subject can use to “obtain information on
the data about himself and their purpose, registered in public records or data bases, or in
private ones intended to supply information” and to achieve “the suppression, rectification,
confidentiality or updating of said data” in case of “false data or discrimination”.

All laws at both the federal and the provincial levels must conform to the Argentinian
Constitution 258. As described in more detail in sections 2.2.1 and 2.3.1, the general principles
following from the Argentinian Constitution are reflected in the specific laws that regulate the
powers of law enforcement and national security authorities.

Second, the right to privacy and important aspects of the right to the protection of personal
data are also guaranteed through Argentina’s adherence to international conventions.

This includes Argentina’s adherence to the American Convention on Human Rights and its
submission to the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights 259. Pursuant to
Article 11 of the Convention, everyone has the right to the protection of the law against
arbitrary or abusive interference with his private life, his family, his home, or his
correspondence. In accordance with Article 30 of the Convention, a public authority may only
interfere with the right to privacy in accordance with laws enacted for reasons of general
interest and in accordance with the purpose for which such restrictions have been established.



256
    Supreme Court of Justice, Halabi, Ernesto c/PEN ley 25.873 and Decree 1563/04 s/ amparo, case number
332:111, judgment of 24 February 2009.
257
    Supreme Court of Justice, Arriola, Sebastián y otros, case number 332:1963, judgement of 25 August 2009.
258
    Article 5 and 31 of the Argentinian Constitution.
259
          See        the       list     of        signatures      and      ratifications,     available      at:
https://www.cidh.oas.org/basicos/english/Basic4.Amer.Conv.Ratif.htm

                                                      35
These protections apply to all persons falling under the jurisdiction of the state parties to the
Convention, irrespective of their nationality 260.

While the Inter-American Court of Human Rights has not yet explicitly recognised the right
to the protection of personal data as part of the right to privacy, it has ruled that the
protections offered by this right extend to telephone conversations 261. In addition, the Court
has specified that, to determine if an interference with the right to privacy is arbitrary or
abusive, three factors must be considered: (1) it must be established by law (2) it must have a
legitimate purpose, and (3) it must be appropriate, necessary and proportionate 262. Regarding
the first factor, the Court has clarified that the law on which the interference is based must be
clear and precise with detailed rules to establish the boundaries of the restriction. This
includes the specific circumstances in which the restriction applies, who can request, order
and carry out the restriction, and procedurally how to implement it 263.

Article 75(22) of the Argentinian Constitution stipulates that the American Convention on
Human Rights and other human rights treaties specifically mentioned in that provision (e.g.,
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights) enjoy “constitutional rank”. As such
they have a higher hierarchy than laws and may only be terminated with the approval of two-
thirds of all the members of each House of Congress 264.

In 2019, Argentina acceded to the Council of Europe Convention 108 for the protection of
individuals with regard to the automatic processing of personal data and its Additional
Protocol, regarding supervisory authorities and transnational data flows (Convention 108)265.
On 17 April 2023 Argentina also ratified the amending Protocol creating the modernised
Convention 108 (Convention 108+) 266. Article 9 of Convention 108 provides that derogations
from the general data protection principles (Article 5 Quality of data), the rules governing
special categories of data (Article 6 Special categories of data) and data subject rights (Article
8 Additional safeguards to the data subject) are only permissible when such derogation is
provided for by the law of the Party and constitutes a necessary measure in a democratic

260
     Article 1 of the Convention: “The States Parties to this Convention undertake to respect the rights and
freedoms recognised herein and to ensure to all persons subject to their jurisdiction the free and full exercise of
those rights and freedoms, without any discrimination for reasons of race, color, sex, language, religion, political
or other opinion, national or social origin, economic status, birth, or any other social condition”.
261
    Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Escher et al. v. Brazil, Series C 200, judgment of 20 November 2009,
paragraph 114. This is the case irrespective of the content of these conversations and can even include both the
technical operations designed to record this content by taping it and listening to it, or any other element of the
communication process (e.g., the destination or origin of the calls that are made, the identity of the speakers, the
frequency, time and duration of the calls). See also Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Tristán Donoso v.
Panama, Series C 193, judgment of 27 January 2009, paragraph 75-76.
262
    Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Escher et al. v. Brazil, Series C 200, judgment of 20 November 2009,
paragraph 129. See also Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Tristán Donoso v. Panama, Series C 193,
judgment of 27 January 2009, paragraph 76.
263
    Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Escher et al. v. Brazil, Series C 200, judgement of 20 November
2009, paragraph 130-131.
264
    The Supreme Court has ruled that human rights treaties ratified by Argentina are binding and applicable in the
domestic legal order. See Supreme Court of Justice, Ekmekdjian, Miguel Ángel v. Sofovich, Gerardo et al., case
number 315:1492, judgment of 7 July 1992. This doctrine was later codified in Article 75(22) of the Argentinian
Constitution.
265
     See the Chart of signatures and ratifications, available at: https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-
list?module=signatures-by-treaty&treatynum=108.
266
     See the Chart of signatures and ratifications, available at: https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-
list?module=signatures-by-treaty&treatynum=223. Convention 108+ has yet to enter into force.

                                                        36
society in the interests of protecting State security, public safety, the monetary interests of the
State or the suppression of criminal offences, or for protecting the data subject or the rights
and freedoms of others. The guarantees set out in Convention 108 are extended to every
individual regardless of nationality or residence 267.

Therefore, through adherence to the American Convention of Human Rights and Convention
108, as well as its submission to the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights, Argentina is subject to a number of obligations, enshrined in international law, that
frame its system of government access on the basis of principles, safeguards and individual
rights similar to those guaranteed under EU law and applicable to the Member States.

Third, the processing of personal data by Argentinian public authorities, including for law
enforcement and national security purposes, is subject to the LPDP 268.

The LPDP limits the processing of personal data by law enforcement and national security
authorities to what is “necessary for the strict compliance with the duties legally assigned to
such bodies for (….) public security or the punishment of crimes” 269. It contains the principles
of lawfulness and fairness, purpose limitation, data minimisation, accuracy, storage limitation
and security 270. Furthermore, the LPDP imposes specific transparency obligations 271 and
recognises the data subject rights of access, rectification and erasure (‘suppression’)272.
Controllers are allowed to deny, in whole or in part, requests to exercise the rights of access,
correction and deletion (‘suppression’), but only for specific purposes listed exhaustively in
the law and similar to the purposes that allow for a restriction of data subject rights in the EU
data protection framework 273. These exemptions are not absolute but require the relevant
authority to decide on a case-by-case basis whether and to what extent to apply them, after
balancing the relevant interests at stake, including the privacy interests of the concerned
individual 274.



267
    See Article 1 of Convention 108, as explained in the Explanatory Report to the Convention, available at:
https://rm.coe.int/16800ca434.
268
    See Article 23(1) LPDP. With regard to national security authorities, see also Article 16c of the National
Intelligence Act, which stipulates that intelligence agencies “shall unjustifiably frame their activities within the
general requirements of the Personal Data Protection Act 25.326”.
269
    Article 23(2) LPDP.
270
    See Article 4(3), 4(1), 4(4), 4(5), 5, 9(2) and 23(3) LPDP. As discussed previously (see section 1.1.), the
AAIP has issued guidance, clarifying and further developing the basic principles, rights and obligations set out in
the LPDP. It is particularly worth recalling here that in Resolution No. 40/2018 the Agency approved a model
data protection policy for public bodies that recommends the designation of a permanent data protection officer.
Furthermore, Resolution No. 47/2018 provides recommended security measures for the storage and (further)
processing of personal data, including a recommendation to notify the AAIP upon a security incident.
271
    Article 6 LPDP.
272
    See Article 14 and 16 LPDP. Regarding the right to suppression, it is important to note that, according to the
AAIP’s Resolution No. 47/2018 on Recommended Security Measures, to suppress data means to “eliminate or
destroy personal data in a definitive way”.
273
    See Article 16(5) and 17 LPDP, i.e., to protect public order, to avoid hindering pending judicial or
administrative proceedings relating to the compliance with tax or social security obligations or the investigation
of crimes and the verification of administrative violations. The decision of the controller to deny the request
must be justified and notice thereof must be given to the concerned data subject, see Article 17(2) LPDP.
274
    See for the need to decide on a case-by-case basis the judgement of the Supreme Court of Justice, Ganora,
Mario Fernando and Others/hábeas corpus, case number 322: 2139, judgment of 16 September 1999. See for the
need to do a balancing exercise the Judgement of the Supreme Court of Justice, Rodriguez María Belén c/
Google Inc. s/ daños y perjuicios, case number 337:1174, judgement of 28 October 2014. See also the AAIP’s

                                                        37
The LPDP and LPDP regulation also contain specific provisions on international transfers to a
third country or international organisation 275. As explained previously (section 1.1), these
provisions follow an approach similar to the one of the EU data protection framework.
Essentially, international transfers are prohibited, unless (1) the AAIP has found that the third
country or international organisation provides “adequate levels of protection”, (2) such
adequate protection is ensured through contractual arrangements between the data exporter
and importer or a “self-regulation system”, or (3) an exception for a specific situation
applies 276.

Finally, the AAIP is charged with monitoring and enforcing these specific rules at the federal
level 277. As regards oversight and enforcement at the provincial level, the LPDP fully applies
– including its provisions on supervision by the AAIP – to personal data that is stored in a
database that can (theoretically) be accessed from all over the country or all over the world 278.

These abovementioned limitations and safeguards can be invoked by individuals before
independent administrative bodies (e.g., the AAIP) and courts to obtain redress, in particular
through the habeas data action (see sections 2.2.2, 2.2.3, 2.3.2 and 2.3.3).

    2.2. Access and use by Argentinian public authorities for criminal law enforcement
         purposes

In Argentina, criminal law enforcement functions are carried out by different authorities. At
federal level, these include the federal police force, as well as other bodies with specific
competences, such as the Gendarmerie and the Prefecture and Airport Police. In the specific
case of financial crime, the responsible authority is the Financial Information Unit (UIF)279.
At the provincial level, criminal law enforcement functions are carried out by the provincial
police forces. Argentinian law imposes a number of limitations on the access and use of
personal data for criminal law enforcement purposes by each of these authorities and provides
oversight and redress mechanisms. The conditions under which such access can take place



resolution      in    the     case     of    Liso     Fabbri,    RESOL-2020-1-APN-AAIP,             available     at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/rs-2020-1-apn-aaip.pdf.
275
    Article 12 LPDP and Article 12 LPDP regulation.
276
    These exceptions are listed in Article 12(2) LPDP and include cases where “the transfer is arranged within the
framework of international treaties which the Argentine Republic is a signatory to”, or “the transfer is made for
international cooperation purposes between intelligence agencies in the fight against organised crime, terrorism
and drug-trafficking”. As explained previously (see section 1.1.), the AAIP through its guidance has clarified
that exceptions to Article 12 LPDP must be interpreted restrictively, and that falling within one of these
exceptions is not sufficient to provide a legal basis for transfers; all the data protection principles, obligations
and rights of the LPDP must always be complied with. In addition, Article 12 LPDP Regulation provides that
“the prohibition of transferring personal data to countries or international or supranational organisations that do
not provide adequate levels of protection, does not apply when the owner of the data has expressly consented to
the transfer”.
277
    See Article 29 LPDP Regulation, which designates the AAIP as the control body for the LPDP. According to
Article 29 LPDP, the Agency must take all necessary actions to ensure compliance with the objectives and other
provisions of the LPDP.
278
    Article 36 and 44 LPDP. As explained previously (see section 1.1), data transferred from the EU to Argentina
is captured by the scope of the entire LPDP, including the provisions regarding the supervisory authority, the
applicable sanctions, and the habeas data action, as such data is typically transmitted in electronic format via the
internet or by other technical means and held in databases that can be accessed via interconnected networks.
279
     Article 5 of Law No. 25.246, available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/ley-25246-
62977/actualizacion.

                                                         38
and the safeguards applicable to the use of those powers are described in the following
sections.

        2.2.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

Personal data transferred from the EU on the basis of the adequacy decision and subsequently
processed by Argentinian controllers/processors may be obtained by Argentinian authorities
for criminal law enforcement purposes by means of investigative measures under, at federal
level, the Federal Code of Criminal Procedure (Código Procesal Penal Federal, CPPF) 280. At
the provincial level, access by Argentinian public authorities to personal data transferred
under the adequacy decision is governed by the provincial codes of criminal procedure, which
provide for conditions, limitations, and safeguards for the access to personal data that are
similar to the ones provided by the laws at federal level 281.

The CPPF provides Argentinian criminal law enforcement authorities with a legal basis to
access personal data held by controllers/processors through searches and seizures, data
seizures, the use of production orders, or the interception of communications. It lays down
clear and precise rules on the scope and application of these measures, thereby ensuring that
the interference with the rights of individuals will be limited to what is necessary for a




280
    Law 27.063 of 10 December 2014, available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/ley-27063-
239340/actualizacion. The Code replaces Argentina’s inquisitive system, laid down in the former Code of
Criminal Procedure of the Nation of 1991 (Código Procesal Penal de la Nación, CPPN), with a full accusatory
system. It is currently being gradually implemented throughout the country, under the auspices of a special
Bicameral Commission established within the scope of Congress by Law 27.063. At present, the CPPN
continues to apply at the federal level in the parts of the country where the CPPF is not yet implemented. In
2019, the provinces of Salta and Jujuy became the first provinces to move to the new accusatory system at the
federal level (Minutes of the Bicameral Commission No. 15 of 26/3/2019). Next in line to move forward with
the reform are the provinces of Mendoza and Rosario (Resolution of the Bicameral Commission CBCPPF-
1/2019 (B.O 6/6/2019)). Detailed information about the implementation of the CPPF can be found on the
website            of           the           Bicameral            Commission,             available         at:
https://www.senado.gob.ar/parlamentario/comisiones/info/379.
281
    Ley 11.922 - Código Procesal Penal de la Provincia de Buenos Aires; Ley 5.097 - Codigo Procesal Penal de
Catamarca; Ley 2.945 - Código procesal penal para la Provincia de Corrientes; Ley 8.123 - Codigo Procesal
Penal de la Provincia de Cordoba; Ley 4.538 - Código Procesal Penal de la Provincia del Chaco; Ley XV - N° 9
- Código Procesal Penal de Chubut; Ley 9.754 - Código Procesal Penal de Entre Ríos; Ley 696 - Código
Procesal Penal de Formosa; Ley 6.259 - Código Procesal Penal de la Provincia de Jujuy; Ley 2.287 - Código
Procesal Penal de la provincia de La Pampa; Ley 1.574 - Código Procesal Penal de La Rioja; Ley 6.730 - Código
Procesal Penal de Mendoza; Ley XIV – NRO. 13 - Código Procesal Penal de la Provincia Misiones; Ley 1.677 -
Código de Procedimiento Penal y Correccional de Neuquén; Ley 5.020 - Código Procesal Penal de Río Negro;
Ley 6.345 - Código Procesal Penal de la Provincia de Salta; Ley 7.398 - Código Procesal Penal de la Provincia
de San Juan; Ley N. VI-0152-2004 (5724 R) - Código Procesal Criminal de la Provincia de San Luis; Ley 2.424
- Código Procesal Penal de la Provincia de Santa Cruz; Ley 6.740 - Código Procesal Penal de Santa Fe; Ley
1.733 - Código Procesal Criminal y Correccional de Santiago del Estero; Ley 6.203 - Código Procesal Penal de
Tucumán; Ley 168 - Código Procesal Penal de la provincia de Tierra del Fuego Antártida e Islas del Atlántico
Sur. The following sections focus exclusively on the conditions, limitations and safeguards contained in the
CPPF and related laws and regulations, in particular the Criminal Code and Law 27.078 on information
technology and communications (Argentina Digital Law). As confirmed by the Argentinian authorities, the
CPPN provides for very similar safeguards for the protection of the privacy of individuals as the CPPF, given
that the main change brought by the CPPF was to replace the inquisitive by an accusatorial system (see in
particular Articles 224-233 on searches and seizures and Articles 234-236 on interception of communications).
Furthermore, based on Article 5 of the Argentinian Constitution, the provincial codes of criminal procedure must
comply with the privacy safeguards set out in Article 18 and 19 of the Constitution.

                                                      39
specific criminal investigation and proportionate to the purpose pursued. Moreover, to
exercise any of these powers, prior judicial authorisation is in principle required 282.

More specifically, searches or seizures may only be carried out if there is a reasonable belief
that evidence related to an investigation, or a suspect related to a crime may be found in a
home or other place 283. In terms of procedural safeguards, a search or seizure may only take
place on the basis of a court-issued warrant 284. Warrantless searches or seizures are allowed
only in a limited number of exceptional circumstances set out in the CPPF 285. The person
subject to the search is always notified of the search and is in principle present when it is
carried out. Where this is not the case, this must be recorded in the minutes of the search286.
Searches and seizures must be carried out with as little interference as possible with the right
to privacy 287. Moreover, certain communications between the defendant and individuals who
must abstain from being a witness (spouse, partner, family member, lawyers, etc.) and objects
may not be seized (notes that these individuals might have taken about confidential
communications with the defendant or any other circumstances to which the right or duty to
abstain from witnessing is extended) 288. Finally, illegal searches are subject to criminal
sanctions 289 and any evidence that is obtained directly or indirectly through a violation of the
fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals is considered inadmissible 290.

Specific limitations and safeguards apply to data seizures, defined in the CPPF as the seizure
of an entire or partial computer system or data stored on a storage disk or hard drive, with the
purpose of seizing the elements of the system, copying the system, or preserving data or
information of interest for the investigation 291. The rules that apply to searches and searches,
described above, apply mutatis mutandis to data seizures (e.g., data seizures can in principle

282
     See Article 13 CPPF, which stipulates that “the right to privacy, especially freedom of thought, home,
correspondence, private documents and any type of communications of the accused and of any other individual
must be respected” and that “only with the authorisation of a judge and in accordance with the provisions laid
down by this code may these rights be interfered with”.
283
    Article 139 and 148 CPPF. Furthermore, the interior of vehicles, aircraft or boats may be searched, if there
are sufficient reasons to presume that objects related to the crime that is under investigation are hidden there, see
Article 137 CPPF. See also Article 224 CPPN.
284
    Article 143 and 144 CPPF. The application for the search warrant and the warrant itself must contain detailed
information. The application must provide, for example, a detailed description of the place(s) to be searched and
the reasons that support its necessity. The warrant itself must contain, inter alia, a description of the
investigation, the context in which it is being conducted and the day on which it is to be conducted. See also
Article 224 CPPN.
285
     In accordance with Article 142 CPPF, a search of a home or other premise may be conducted without a
judicial order only in the following cases: a) when there is a fire, explosion or flood, or any other situation that
threatens the lives of the residents or the property b) when a complaint has been made on the grounds that one or
more individuals were seen entering a house or shop with clear evidence of having committed a crime, whenever
it is plausible in relation to the circumstances given c) when a suspect, who is being pursued, enters a house or
shop d) when voices coming from a house or shop cry for help or indicate that a crime is being committed
therein, and e) when there are well-founded reasons to believe that a person is in danger or is being held hostage
in a house or shop, the representative of the Public Prosecutor’s Office must authorize the search. The same
exceptions apply based on Article 227 CPPN.
286
    145 CPPF. Only in exceptional circumstances this safeguard does not apply. The CPPF provides that if, due
to an obvious risk to the safety of the witnesses to the procedure, it is necessary for the authority to enter the
place earlier, it will do so for the time strictly necessary to neutralize the danger. A record of the circumstances
will be left in the minutes. See also Article 224 and 228 CPPN.
287
    Article 146 CPPF.
288
    Article 149 CPPF. See also Article 237 CPPN.
289
    Article 151 Criminal Code.
290
    Article 129 CPPF.
291
    Article 151 CPPF.

                                                         40
only take place based on a judicial warrant). Illegal accessing of computer data is subject to
criminal sanctions 292 and any evidence that is obtained directly or indirectly through a
violation of the fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals is considered inadmissible 293.

Argentinian law enforcement authorities may furthermore obtain personal data through the
interception of communications 294. This power may only be used in the context of a criminal
investigation and on the basis of a judicial warrant 295. An interception of communications
may be authorised whenever this is “useful for the investigation of a crime” 296. Importantly,
the Supreme Court, in its capacity as head of the Argentinian judiciary, has introduced
additional conditions for the interception of communications by issuing guidelines, addressed
to all judicial bodies, which clarify that the interception of communications is “an exceptional
measure that may only be authorised with a restrictive approach” 297. Moreover, based on
settled case-law of the Supreme Court and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, any
interference with the inviolability of communications must be provided for by law, pursue a
legitimate aim and comply with the requirements of suitability, necessity and
proportionality 298.

Procedurally, interception requests must be submitted to federal judges 299, who must approve
interception warrants before the interception is conducted by or at the request of the Legal
Assistance Directorate for Complex and Organised Crime, a subsidiary body of the Supreme
Court 300. An interception warrant is only valid for a maximum period of 30 days and may be
renewed by the court once for the same period, if there are reasons that justify the
prolongation of this term given the nature and circumstances of the crime under

292
    Article 153bis and 157bis Criminal Code.
293
    Article 129 CPPF.
294
    Article 150 CPPF. Communications includes postal, telegraphic, electronic correspondence or any other form
of communication or of any other effect sent by the accused or intended for this one, albeit under an assumed
name (Article 150 CPPF). See also Article 234 and 236 CPPN. Transgressions that are punishable as a crime are
defined in Book 2 of the Criminal Code (Law No. 11.179). Outside the Criminal Code, special criminal laws or
other laws can also define certain transgressions as a crime.
295
    There are no exceptions to this requirement as Article 5 of the Argentina Digital Act stipulates that the
interception of communications, as well as its subsequent registration and analysis, will only proceed at the
request of a competent judge.
296
    Article 150 CPPF. See also Article 234 CPPN.
297
        See      Agreement        (‘Acordada’)     17/2019     of      19    June    2019,     available     at:
https://www.csjn.gov.ar/documentos/descargar?ID=117364. In this regard, the Agreement notes that the judge
examining the request for an interception warrant must have “particular regard to its reasonableness for the
purpose of clarifying and resolving the crime”. The court order must be “well founded” and may not “be granted
on the basis of general terms”. It may furthermore “not be intended to obtain indeterminate information with a
view to a general and abstract need to prevent or detect criminal offences”.
298
    Supreme Court, Halabi, Ernesto c/ PEN law 25,873 and decree 1563/04 on an amparo complaint, case
number 332:111, judgment of 24 February 2009, recital 25; Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Escher and
Others v. Brazil, Series C 200, judgment of 6 July 2009, paragraph 116, and its citation of the case of Tristan
Donoso vs Panama, Series C 193, judgment of 27 January 2009, paragraph 56. See also Article 150 CPPF, which
stipulates that when assessing a request for an interception warrant, the court must examine the legality and
reasonableness of the request.
299
    Article 150 CPPF. The request for the warrant must indicate the term of duration that it deems necessary
according to the circumstances of the case.
300
    The Legal Assistance Directorate for Complex and Organised Crime, which was transferred from the Public
Prosecutor’s Office to the Supreme Court in December 2015, is the only competent authority for carrying out an
interception      of    communications.      See    Article   1     of    Decree  256/2015,     available    at:
http://servicios.infoleg.gob.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/255000-259999/257346/texact.htm.    See      also    the
Agreement (‘Acordada’) 2/2016 of the Supreme Court of 15 February 2016, available at:
https://www.csjn.gov.ar/documentos/descargar?ID=96793.

                                                      41
investigation 301. The interception must be stopped if the reasons used to authorise the measure
disappear, or once the interception warrant has expired or its aim has been achieved 302.
According to explanations received from the AAIP, the defendant will be notified during the
criminal proceedings of any interference with his/her privacy, when this no longer endangers
the investigation, to enable him/her to contest the legality of that measure and exercise his/her
constitutional right of defence in court 303.

Illegal wiretapping and related conduct are subject to criminal sanctions 304 and evidence that
is obtained directly or indirectly through a violation of the fundamental rights and freedoms of
individuals is considered inadmissible 305.

Under the CPPF, criminal law enforcement authorities may also obtain a production order
from a court, ordering a person to hand over objects or documents under his/her power that
can serve as evidence 306. When the production order is not being complied with, the sought-
after objects or documents may be seized.

Finally, the UIF may obtain personal data through disclosure by private individuals, business
organisations or public authorities.

Law 25.246 imposes an obligation on persons and undertakings subject to the law, such as
financial institutions (so-called “parties under obligation”) 307, to report to the UIF, on their
own initiative, any suspicious fact or transaction, regardless of the amount involved 308. A
suspicious transaction is defined as “those transactions which, in accordance with the customs
and practises of the activity in question, as well as the experience and suitability of the
persons obliged to report, are unusual, without economic or legal justification or of unusual or
unjustified complexity, whether carried out on an isolated or repeated basis” 309. Prior to
notifying the UIF, parties under obligation are required to identify their clients, determine the
origin and legality of their funds and to store, in physical or digital form, the information
collected on their clients for a minimum period of five years. This information must allow for
the reconstruction of transactions carried out, whether domestical or international, and be
available for the UIF or the competent authorities when required by them 310.

         2.2.2. Further use of the information collected

301
    Article 150 CPPF.
302
    Article 150 CPPF.
303
    Article 18 of the Constitution. Where the existence of an intrusive measure is not notified to the data subject
because the procedure has been concluded due to “lack of merit”, the AAIP has indicated that there is no
obligation in Argentinian criminal procedural law to notify the data subject. However, the AAIP considers that
Article 6 PDPL obliges all data controllers to notify data subjects that information related to them is being
processed. This would, in its view, include criminal law enforcement authorities and imply an obligation to make
a deferred notification, when the risk for the investigation “diminishes”.
304
    Article 153 Criminal Code.
305
    Article 129 CPPF.
306
    Article 147 CPPF. Persons who must refrain from testifying as witnesses are exempt from this provision. See
also Article 232 CPPN.
307
    The “parties under obligation” are defined in Article 20 Law 25.246 and include financial institutions;
individuals or legal persons who, as a regular activity, operate games of chance; insurance companies; public
notaries; a number of public authorities including the Central Bank and the Federal Administration of Public
Revenues, and registered real estate agents or brokers.
308
    Article 21 Law 25.246.
309
    Article 21(b) Law 25.246.
310
    Article 21bis Law 25.246.

                                                        42
The further use of data collected by Argentinian criminal law enforcement authorities on one
of the grounds referred to in Section 2.2.1, as well as the sharing of such data with a different
authority for purposes other than the ones for which it was originally collected (so-called
‘onward sharing’), is subject to safeguards and limitations.

First, the processing of personal data by law enforcement authorities in Argentina is governed
by the LPDP as described in section 2.1. With respect to onward sharing, it follows from the
LPDP that personal data collected for law enforcement purposes may be shared with other
public authorities for purposes directly related to the legitimate interests of the original
controller and the recipient 311. In this case, the recipient shall be subject to the same
regulatory and legal obligations as the controller disclosing the data and the latter shall
respond jointly and severally for the observance of such obligations before the AAIP and the
data subject 312. Even though the further processing does not require the consent of the data
subject in this case 313, the Argentinian authorities have confirmed that, in accordance with the
LPDP 314, the data subject must nevertheless be informed about the purpose of the processing
and the identity of the recipient, or other elements that enable the data subject to identify the
recipient. Moreover, these requirements are without prejudice to the principles, obligations
and rights provided for in the LPDP (e.g., the purpose of the onward sharing has to be
compatible with the original purpose of collection). The LPDP and LPDP regulation
furthermore contain specific provisions on international transfers to a third country or
international organisation. As explained previously (see section 2.1), these provisions follow
an approach similar to the one of the EU data protection framework.

Second, the different laws that allow for data collection by criminal law enforcement
authorities in Argentina impose specific limitations and safeguards as to the use and further
dissemination of the information obtained in exercising the powers they grant.

As regards the powers of search and seizure, the CPPF provides that seized objects must be
described, inventoried and placed in safe custody to prevent their modification or
substitution 315. Seized objects that are not subject to confiscation, restitution or embargo must
be returned immediately to their owners, after carrying out the procedures for which they
were obtained 316. Regarding data seizures, the CPPF notably provides that any elements that
are seized, but are unrelated to the investigation, must be returned to their rightful owner and
that any copies that have been made must be destroyed. The data subject may turn to the
judge to ensure that the elements are returned and that any copies are destroyed 317.

With respect to the interception of communications, the CPPF sets out the safeguards that
need to be applied to the intercepted material. The officials in charge with the execution of the
interception warrant and/or those who are responsible for the evidence are bound to a duty of
confidentiality with respect to the information obtained. Those who fail to comply with this

311
    Article 11 LPDP.
312
    Article 11(4) LPDP.
313
    Article 11(3)(c) LPDP.
314
    Article 11(1) LPDP.
315
    Article 148 CPPF. The obtaining of copies, reproductions or images of the objects may be arranged when it is
more convenient for the investigation. See also Article 233 CPPN.
316
    Article 156 CPPF.
317
    Article 151 CPPF.

                                                      43
duty can be held criminally liable 318. Once the correspondence or intercepted elements have
been obtained, a representative from the Public Prosecutor’s Office must open them, examine
the elements and read the contents of the correspondence. The representative must
subsequently explain to a judge, in a one-party hearing, how and why the seized objects are
related and necessary to the investigation. The judge must keep any remaining content
confidential and order its return to the defendant, his or her representatives, or close
relatives 319. At the end of the proceedings, the sound records of the communications and
transcripts that have been made must be protected from public access. They may not be
accessed for any purpose, except by court order, and for justified reasons 320.

In terms of investigative measures carried out in the context of the fight against money
laundering and terrorism financing, Law 25.246 requires the UIF to submit to the Public
Prosecutor’s Office the cases in which there is reasonable suspicion of the commission of a
criminal offence 321.

Finally, Law No. 24.767 provides the rules on mutual legal assistance in criminal matters 322.
This law only applies when there is no mutual legal assistance treaty in place between
Argentina and the requesting State323. In such cases, the law provides that Argentina shall
render to any State that so requires the widest assistance in the investigation, prosecution and
punishment of offences falling within its jurisdiction 324. Under this ‘principle of broad and
prompt cooperation’ the granting of assistance (e.g., the provision of evidence, the execution
of a search warrant or the interception of communications) is in principle an obligation for the
Argentine authorities 325. However, the request for assistance must be admissible 326 and the

318
    Article 150 CPPF. The Legal Assistance Directorate for Complex and Organised Crime has signed a MoU
with the Argentinian Federal Police detailing the rules and security measures concerning access to private
communications            in        the         context         of        a        warrant,       available       at:
https://www.csjn.gov.ar/documentos/descargar?ID=106317.
319
    Article 152 CPPF. See also Article 235 CPPN.
320
    Article 153 CPPF.
321
    Article 19 Law 25.246. When the reported transaction is linked to facts under investigation in a criminal case,
the UIF may communicate its suspicion directly to the intervening judge.
322
        Law No. 24.767 on International cooperation in criminal matters, available at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/ley-24767-41442/texto.
323
    Article 2 Law No. 24.767.
324
    Article 1 Law No. 24.767.
325
    Article 11 Law No. 24.767 lists the following grounds for refusal of an extradition request, which apply
mutatis mutandis to other requests for legal assistance (see Article 70): (a) if the criminal action or the
punishment have lapsed according to the law of the requesting State (b) if the person whose extradition is
requested has already been tried, in Argentina or in any other country, for the action for which extradition is
sought (c) if the person whose extradition is requested would been considered to be below the age of criminal
liability pursuant to Argentine law if such person had committed the crime in Argentina (d) if judgment has been
rendered in absentia and the requesting State does not provide sufficient assurance that the case would be
reopened to hear the convicted person, allow him to assert his rights of defence and render a new judgment
accordingly (e) If the requesting State did not provide sufficient assurance that the time during which the person
sought is deprived of his liberty during the processing of the extradition shall be considered time served by the
extradited person for the proceeding that gave rise to the request.
326
    Article 8 and 10 Law No. 24.767 list the following grounds for in-admissibility for requests for extradition,
which apply mutatis mutandis to requests for legal assistance (see Article 70): (1) if the offence for which
extradition is requested is regarded as an offence of a political nature (2) if the offence for which extradition is
requested is an offence under military criminal law, which is not also an offence under ordinary criminal law (3)
if it is sought in the framework of a process pending before one of the ad hoc commissions prohibited under
Article 18 of the Argentine Constitution (4) if there are substantial grounds to believe that the request for
extradition has been made for the purpose of prosecuting or punishing a person on account of that person’s
political opinions, nationality, race, religion, or that that person’s rights of defence may be prejudiced for any of

                                                         44
obligation to grant assistance does not apply if the assistance sought involves the seizure of
property, search of premises, surveillance of persons, postal interception, or phone tapping 327.

         2.2.3    Oversight

The activities of Argentinian criminal law enforcement authorities are supervised by different
bodies.

First, the AAIP is competent to oversee the processing of personal data by Argentinian
criminal law enforcement authorities 328. The AAIP can, at its own initiative or acting on a
complaint by an individual, investigate potential violations of the provisions of the LPDP or
its complementary rules 329. In carrying out its oversight activities, the AAIP has access to all
relevant information. In particular, it may request information from public authorities, which
are required to provide background, documents, software or any other elements relating to
personal data that such entities may be required to process 330. In addition, it may request a
judicial authorisation to access data processing premises, equipment, or software to verify
violations of the LPDP 331.

If the AAIP finds a violation of the LPDP, it provides the relevant public authority with a
decision stating that the facts investigated constitute an infraction, who is responsible for that
infraction, and the sanction to be applied 332. For example, in 2019 the Agency carried out an
ex officio investigation into the Argentinian Federal Police over the leaking of information
from its databases 333. This investigation established that the police had not taken the
necessary measures to ensure the security and confidentiality of the personal data processed.
As a consequence, the AAIP issued three warnings to the Federal Police, two for having
breached the duties of data security and confidentiality and one for not having fully
cooperated with the AAIP’s investigation.

Second, the Argentine Constitution provides for an independent Ombudsman (Defensor del
Pueblo) to be elected by the Argentine Parliament whose mission is “the defense and
protection of human rights and other rights, guarantees and interests protected in this
Constitution and the laws, against facts, acts or omissions of the Administration; and control
of the exercise of public administrative functions” 334. It may investigate, ex officio or at the

those reasons (5) if there are substantial grounds to believe that the person whose extradition is requested could
be subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (6) if the offence for which
extradition is requested carries the death penalty under the law of the requesting State, and the requesting State
does not provide sufficient assurance that the death penalty will not be imposed (7) if Argentina is of the opinion
that the request, if granted, would prejudice its sovereignty, security, public order or other essential interests.
327
    Article 5 and 68 of Law No. 24.767. The granting of a request for legal assistance is also subject to the
existence or offer of reciprocity, see Article 3 Law No. 24.767.
328
    See Article 23(1) LPDP.
329
    Article 31 LPDP Regulation. It may also start an investigation acting on a complaint by the Ombudsman or
consumer or user organisations.
330
    Article 29(1)(e) LPDP.
331
    Article 29(1)(d) LPDP.
332
    Article 31(3)(h) LPDP Regulation. Administrative sanctions can consist of a warning, suspension, or a fine,
or the closure or cancellation of the file, register or data base, see Article 31 LPDP.
333
         Case         No       EX-2019-72366951-            -APN-DNPDP           #      AAIP,       available       at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/sites/default/files/rs-2020-30-apn-aaip.pdf.
334
    Article 86 of the Argentine Constitution. The functions of the Ombudsman are currently exercised by the
office’s Assistant Secretary-General, following the resignation of the second Ombudsman in 2009 and the end of
the Deputy Ombudsman’s term in 2013. In 2014, a parliamentary resolution was issued authorising the Secretary

                                                          45
request of an individual, any act or omission of the public administration or its agents that
involves the illegitimate, defective, irregular, abusive, arbitrary, discriminatory, negligent,
seriously inconvenient or inappropriate exercise of their functions, including those capable of
affecting diffuse or collective interests 335. The independence of the Ombudsperson is
guaranteed by law 336, and in carrying out its investigations the Ombudsman has access to all
relevant information 337.

Based on the findings of his investigation, the Ombudsman may issue warnings and
recommendations, reminders of the public authority’s legal and functional duties, and
proposals for the adoption of new measures 338. If the Ombudsman through his work becomes
aware of potential crimes committed by public authorities, he must immediately notify the
Attorney-General 339. The Ombudsman is required to lay an annual report before Parliament
with an account of the number and types of complaints submitted, those that have been
rejected and the reason for their rejection, as well as those that have been investigated and
their outcome 340. According to the last figures available, the Ombudsman in 2022 initiated
234 ex officio investigations and received 12.210 complaints from citizens 341.



General to exercise the functions of the Ombudsman until Congress appoints a new Ombudsman. This resolution
was issued by the Bicameral Commission of Congress provided for in Article 2 Law 24.284, which is
responsible for the procedure to elect the Ombudsman. See Resolution 001/2014 of 23 April 2014.
335
       Article 14 Law No. 24.284 on the office of the Ombudsman, available at:
https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/ley-24284-680/actualizacion. Legislators, both Provincial and
National, may receive complaints from interested parties, which they are required to immediately forward to the
Ombudsman. The public administration and its agents include state enterprises and private companies providing
public services, see Article 16 and 17 of the Law. The judiciary, the legislature, the Municipality of the City of
Buenos Aires, and defence and security bodies are exempted from the scope of competence of the Ombudsman’s
Office (Article 16). The Ombudsman may be approached by any natural or legal person who considers
themselves affected by the acts, deeds or omissions provided for in Article 14, irrespective of their nationality
(see Article 18).
336
    See Article 86 of the Argentine Constitution and Article 1 Law No. 24.284. The Ombudsman has the
immunities and privileges of legislators. Based on Article 12 Law No. 24.284, he may not be arrested from the
day of his appointment until the day of his dismissal or suspension, except in the case of being caught ‘in
flagrante delicto’ in the commission of an intentional crime. The Ombudsman is appointed for a period of five
years, which can be renewed once, and can only be removed by Congress with the vote of two-thirds of the
members present of each House, on specific grounds, set out in Article 10 Law No. 24.284 (e.g., due to
supervening incapacity, for having been convicted by a final judgement for an intentional crime, or for notorious
negligence in the fulfilment of the duties of the office or for having incurred in the situation of incompatibility
provided for by this law). The Ombudsman has its own budget, which is approved by the Parliament (Article 36
Law No. 24.284).
337
    Article 24 Law No. 24.284. Requested information may only be refused when it is based on safeguarding an
interest related to national security. Anyone who prevents the effective filing of a complaint with the
Ombudsman or obstructs the investigations under his charge, by refusing to send the required reports, or
prevents access to files or documentation necessary for the course of the investigation, can be held criminally
liable for the crime of obstruction, as provided for in Article 239 Criminal Code (which carries a maximum
sentence of imprisonment for one year), see Article 25 Law No. 24.284.
338
    Article 28 Law No. 24.284. If the recommendations are made and the public authority concerned fails to take
appropriate action within a reasonable period of time or fails to inform the Ombudsman of the reasons for not
adopting them, the Ombudsman may bring the background of the matter and the proposed recommendations to
the attention of the relevant minister or highest authority of the entity concerned. If he fails to obtain adequate
justification, he should include the matter in his or her annual or special report, mentioning the names of the
authorities or officials who have adopted such an attitude.
339
    Article 26 Law No. 24.284.
340
    Article 32 Law No. 24.284.
341
           See        the       Ombudsman’s           2022        Annual         Report,         available      at:
https://www.dpn.gob.ar/documentos/anuales/ianual2022.pdf.

                                                        46
Finally, different specialised bodies play a role in ensuring law enforcement authorities’
compliance with data protection law, for example the General National Syndicate (SIGEN)
and the General National Auditor (AGN) 342. The SIGEN responds to the President of
Argentina and has investigative powers to undertake or coordinate independent audits into,
inter alia, the legality of public authorities’ actions, which could include data protection
law 343. The AGN reports to the National Congress and enjoys similar powers 344.

         2.2.4    Redress

The Argentinian system offers different (judicial) avenues to obtain redress, including
compensation for damages.

First, individuals have a right to obtain access to and rectification or deletion (‘suppression’)
of their data held by public authorities.

The LPDP provides that data subjects have the right to request and obtain information on their
personal data included in, inter alia, public data registers or databanks 345. In addition, every
person has the right to rectify, update, and when applicable, suppress or keep confidential his
or her personal data included in a data bank 346. Both the right of access and the right to
rectification and deletion may be exercised free of charge 347. The relevant public authority
may only refuse requests based on the right of access and the right to rectification and
deletion in the interest of safeguarding certain important public interest (i.e., public order, the
investigation of crimes and the verification of administrative violations) or to protect the
rights and interests of others 348. These exemptions are not absolute but require the relevant
authority to decide on a case-by-case basis whether to invoke them, after balancing the
relevant interests at stake, including the privacy interests of the individual concerned 349. As
will be explained in more detail below, individuals whose requests have been denied have the
342
    Respectively, Sindicatura General de la Nación and Auditoría General de la Nación. Both bodies were
created by Law No. 24.156 on Financial Administration and National Public Sector Control Systems.
343
    Article 104 (c) Law No. 24.156.
344
    Articles 117, 119 and 130 Law No. 24.156.
345
    Article 14 LPDP. Article 14 LPDP Regulation further clarifies that the right of access enables the data subject
to receive information on: (1) whether his/her data are contained in the archive, register, database or databank,
(2) all the data concerning him/her that are in the archive, (3) the sources from and means by which they were
obtained, (4) the purpose for which they were obtained, (5) the possible recipients and (6) whether the archive is
registered pursuant to the LPDP. The Argentinian authorities have confirmed that the data subject can also obtain
a copy of the data, although if this implies high costs for the controller, it is possible that s/he will have to bear
such costs. Article 15 of the PDPL further specifies the requirements in terms of information to be provided to
the data subject exercising his right of access. In particular, the information must be provided clearly, without
any codes that might make the text difficult to read and, where applicable, enclosing an explanation of the terms
used, in a language that is understood by a citizen with an average degree of education. Moreover, the
information must be extensive and deal with the full record corresponding to the owner, even in case the request
submitted refers to only one item of personal data. In no case shall the report disclose information referring to
third parties, even if such third parties are related to the requesting party. The information may, at the owner's
option, be provided in writing, by electronic, telephonic, visual, or other adequate means for such purpose.
346
    Article 16 LPDP. During the process for the verification and rectification of the relevant mistake or
inaccuracy in the information, the person responsible for or the user of the data bank must either block the access
to the file, or indicate, when providing the information relating thereto, that such information is subject to
revision. See Article 16(6) LPDP.
347
    Article 14(3) and 19 LPDP. The right of access may only be exercised free of charge “within intervals no
shorter than six months unless a legitimate interest to do otherwise is shown”.
348
    Article 16(5) and 17 LPDP. The resolution so providing must be duly reasoned and notice thereof be given to
the concerned individual, see Article 17(2) LPDP.
349
    See section 2.1.

                                                         47
possibility to pursue the special judicial remedy of ‘habeas data’ to gain access to their data or
to have that data rectified or deleted 350.

Second, any individual may lodge a complaint with the AAIP in respect of any matter relating
to the handling of personal information by a criminal law enforcement authority 351. As
described in section 2.2.3, if the AAIP finds a violation of the LPDP, it provides the relevant
public authority with a decision stating that the facts investigated constitute an infraction, who
is responsible for the infraction and what is the administrative sanction to be applied 352.
Decisions of the AAIP may be challenged before the courts in accordance with Title 4 of the
Law on Administrative Procedure 353. The court may declare the decision void 354. Decisions
that are declared void must be revoked or replaced by the AAIP 355.

Third, judicial redress is available to all data subjects via the constitutional right to a habeas
data action. The LPDP provides the conditions for a habeas data action before courts against
actions by public authorities 356. Once the deadline for the controller to either provide the
information requested by the data subject, or to correct, delete or update the information, has
expired and the controller has not complied with the request, or if the data subject considers
the response insufficient, s/he may initiate a judicial habeas data procedure 357. Importantly,
the Supreme Court has ruled that the standing requirement for a habeas data action against a
public authority must be interpreted extensively in order to facilitate the exercise of the
fundamental right to privacy as enshrined in Article 43 of the Constitution 358.

Judicial redress is also available via the general civil and administrative law actions available
against public authorities, including law enforcement authorities.

First, data subjects may pursue a claim for the compensation of damages 359 in court, subject to
the four basic requirements for any damages claim under Argentinian law: illegality of the
damaging action; real and actual damage; cause-effect relationship between the action and the
damage; and negligence, wrongful misconduct and fault. Second, a preventative action 360
would allow a data subject to request a judge to impose preventive restrictions and obligations
350
    See Article 33 LPDP and further.
351
    Article 31(3)(a) LPDP Regulation.
352
    Article 31(3)(h) LPDP Regulation.
353
    Available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/ley-19549-22363/actualizacion.
354
    Article 15 Law on Administrative Procedure.
355
    Article 17 Law on Administrative Procedure.
356
    Article 33, 34 and 37 LPDP.
357
    Article 14(2) LPDP.
358
    Judgement of the Supreme Court of Justice, Barcat, Abdo c/ Registro Nacional de Reincidencia dep. del
Ministerio de Justicia y Seguridad y Derechos Humanos, case number 330:24, judgement of 12 October 2006. In
this case, the Supreme Court granted the applicant the right to access its data in a database for law enforcement
managed by the Ministry of Justice, Security and Human Rights. According to the Supreme Court: “If almost
three years have elapsed without the application having been definitively established, and in the case of a
procedure intended to guarantee a fundamental right, such as the right to honour, privacy and the protection of
personal data, based on the third paragraph of Article 43 of the National Constitution, it is necessary to dispel the
procedural concerns that deserve the way in which the dispute was brought and to resolve the issue of
jurisdiction without further formality, where this is advisable for reasons of procedural economy and the delay in
the decision could lead to a virtual denial of justice’” and: “the national courts have jurisdiction in federal
administrative disputes to decide on the request for the deletion, rectification and updating of certain data stored
in the National Register of Relief under the Ministry of Justice, Security and Human Rights of the Nation, since
such judicial activity is linked to data or administrative acts carried out by public authorities”.
359
    Acción civil de daños y perjuicios, see Article 1716 of the Civil and Commercial Code.
360
    Acción preventiva, Article 1711 of the Civil and Commercial Code.

                                                         48
on a data controller before there is specific damage, if the data subject is in a position to prove
that the damage has a qualified probability to occur. Third, via a generic action 361 a data
subject may request a judge to make a controller comply with any of the mandatory principles
of the LPDP, even if he has not filed a complaint with the AAIP. This type of remedy is
available when the habeas data action is not possible, i.e., when the action does not concern
the exercise of a right of access, rectification or deletion of personal data. In practice, this type
of action is most often combined with a claim for damages. Fourth, through an action for
annulment 362 an individual who has been the object of a criminal investigation may challenge
the court orders affecting him. This type of action can only be brought after the facts affecting
his or her privacy have occurred. In case the challenge is rejected, the individual can request a
review by the superior court. Moreover, under certain circumstances, the individual can
become a plaintiff in the criminal proceeding. Finally, Article 52 of the Civil and Commercial
Code establishes that any individual harmed in his or her personal or family privacy, honour
or reputation, image or identity, or who in any way has his or her personal dignity
undermined, may claim prevention and reparation of the damage suffered.

Finally, when all national redress avenues are exhausted, data subjects may lodge a case
before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights for any violation of their fundamental right
of privacy enshrined in the American Convention on Human Rights.

    2.3 Access and use by Argentinian public authorities for national security purposes

In Argentina, two agencies may access personal data transferred from the EU to Argentina for
national security purposes: the Federal Intelligence Agency (AFI) and the National Criminal
Intelligence Directorate (DINICRI). The AFI is the highest-ranking intelligence agency in
Argentina and the director of the so-called National Intelligence System, which consists of the
AFI, the DNICRI and the National Military Intelligence Directorate (DINIEM) 363. The AFI
was established in 2015 by Law 27.126 on the creation of the Federal Intelligence Agency
and Presidential Decree No. 1311/2015 approving the “New National Intelligence Doctrine”,
as part of a major overhaul of Argentina’s intelligence services 364. In accordance with Article
2(5) of Law 25.520 (National Intelligence Act) and Decree No. 1311/2015, the basic task of
these intelligence agencies is to generate knowledge for the purpose of contributing to
decision-making in relation to matters relevant to national defence and internal security 365.

361
    Acciòn genérica, see for instance ruling of the Federal Administrative Chamber of August 2023, CFed.
CONT. ADM., Chamber V, Civil Rights Association c/EN-M Interior Op. and V-RENAPER-Ley27275
s/Ampari Ley 16.986, 16/08/2023, p. 5, TRLALEY AR/JUR/103536/2023, available at: https://adc.org.ar/wp-
content/uploads/2023/08/sentencia-por-filtracion-de-datos-renaper-web.pdf.
362
    Acciòn de nulidad, see also Articles 166 and 167 Code of Criminal Procedure.
363
    Article 6 and 7 National Intelligence Act. The DINIEM is mandated to gather strategic military intelligence
(see Article 10 National Intelligence Act). Article 2(4) of the Act defines ‘strategic military intelligence’ as
“intelligence relating to knowledge of the capabilities and weaknesses of the military potential of countries of
national defence interest, as well as the geographical environment of the operational strategic areas identified by
the military strategic planning”. According to information received, the activities of the DINIEM may not be
directed at Argentinian individuals or corporations, or any person in Argentina. Therefore, the following sections
focus solely on the access and use of personal data by the AFI and DINICRI.
364
    As part of this overhaul, the former Intelligence Secretariat was dissolved. See Article 24 Law 27.126.
365
    The latter notion is defined in Article 2 National Intelligence Act as “the factual situation based on the law in
which the freedom, life and heritage of the inhabitants, their rights and guarantees and the full validity of the
institutions of the representative, republican and federal system established by the National Constitution are
protected”. The notion is further specified in Annex I, Chapter I, of Decree No. 1311/2015 as “the security that
covers criminal acts that violate the freedoms and rights of the individuals and of the social, constitutional and

                                                         49
More specifically, the AFI is tasked with producing (1) national intelligence and (2) criminal
intelligence related to complex federal crimes 366. The DINICRI is tasked with producing
criminal intelligence unless it is related to complex federal crimes 367. The relevant powers of
these agencies, as regulated by the National Intelligence Act and its regulatory decree are
described in the following sections.

         2.3.1    Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

Based on the National Intelligence Act and Decree No. 1311/2015, the AFI and DNICRI may
access personal data transferred from the EU to Argentina as part of different activities, which
are subject to specific limitations and safeguards following from the National Intelligence Act
itself, from the LPDP, the Argentinian Constitution, the Argentina Digital Act, and case law.

Pursuant to the National Intelligence Act, the intelligence agencies must “unequivocally
frame their activities within the general prescriptions of the Personal Data Protection Act
25.326” 368. Therefore, the accessing of personal data transferred from the EU to Argentina by
these agencies for national security purposes may only take place in so far this is necessary
for the performance of their legal duties 369.

According to Decree No. 1311/2015, the task of the intelligence agencies is to develop
“intelligence information, which comprises the body of observations and measurements
obtained or gathered from public or classified sources concerning an event or relevant issues
in the field of national defence or internal security” 370. It furthermore specifies that
intelligence is developed through three core institutional tasks: information gathering,


democratic State”. More specifically, this notion encompasses (1) terrorism, (2) attacks on the constitutional
order and democratic life (e.g., political and/or military groups taking up arms against the public authorities
and/or the constitutional order), (3) organised crime (e.g., human, arms and drug trafficking) and (4) cybercrime
(e.g., offences against the confidentiality, integrity and availability of computer systems, networks or data). The
notion of ‘national defence’ is defined in Article 2 Law No. 23.554 on national defence as “the integration and
coordinated action of all Nation forces to resolve conflicts that require the use of the armed forces, in a
dissuasive or effective manner, to tackle attacks of external origin”. Article 3 Law No. 23.554 furthermore
provides that “the fundamental difference between the national defence and internal security must be taken into
account at all times”. Matters related to national defence are further specified in Annex I, Chapter I of Decree
No. 1311/2015 as “possible risks of conflicts generated by aggressions of external origin perpetrated by armed
forces belonging to other states against the sovereignty, territorial integrity or political independence of our
country, or in any other way that is incompatible with the United Nations Charter”.
366
    Article 8 National Intelligence Act. In accordance with Article 2(1) of the Act, ‘national intelligence’ means
“the activity of obtaining, gathering, systematising and analysing specific information relating to facts, risks and
conflicts affecting national defence and the internal security of the nation”. Article 2(3) of the Act defines
‘criminal intelligence’ as “intelligence relating to specific criminal activities which, by their nature, scale,
foreseeable consequences, dangerousness or manner, affect the freedom, life, property of inhabitants, their rights
and guarantees and the institutions of the representative, republican and federal system established by the
National Constitution”.
367
    Article 9 National Intelligence Act. Both the AFI and DINICRI are expressly prohibited from using law
enforcement powers and carrying out criminal investigations, see Article 4(1) National Intelligence Act, which
provides that “no intelligence agency may carry out repressive tasks, possess compulsive powers, or perform
police or criminal investigation duties”.
368
    Article 16c National Intelligence Act.
369
    Article 23(2) LPDP provides, in so far relevant here: “The treatment of personal data with national defence or
public security purposes by the armed forces, security forces, police or intelligence agencies, without the consent
of the parties concerned, is limited to those cases and categories of data as are necessary for the strict compliance
with the duties legally assigned to such bodies for the national defence, public security or the punishment of
crimes”.
370
    Decree No. 1311/2015, Annex I, Chapter II.

                                                         50
information management and information analysis. Specifically with regard to the AFI, the
decree stipulates that the AFI may, for the purpose of the production of national intelligence,
engage in “the collection, gathering and analysis of information on facts, risks and conflicts
affecting national defence and internal security through the agencies that are part of the
National Intelligence System” 371. This activity involves the gathering of strategic
intelligence 372 and (ii) counterintelligence 373. Furthermore, to produce criminal intelligence
relating to complex federal crimes, the AFI may engage in “the collection, systematisation
and analysis of information on the criminal issues in question using AFI resources” 374.

The use of these powers is subject to limitations and safeguards that are specifically designed
to prevent their (mis)use for political purposes and operations, and to ensure the protection of
fundamental rights, including those guaranteed by Article 18 and 19 of the Argentinian
Constitution. In particular, the Act provides that no intelligence agency may (1) exercise law
enforcement powers or carry out criminal investigations (2) produce intelligence based solely
on sensitive data of data subjects or (3) interfere in any way with the country’s institutional,
political, military, police, social or economic situation, its foreign policy, its political parties,
public opinion, individuals, media or associations of any kind 375.

In terms of procedural safeguards, any intelligence activity must be ordered by the highest
body of each authority 376. Moreover, any intelligence activities involving the interception of
private communications of any kind 377 may, without exception 378, only be carried out when
authorised by a judicial warrant 379.

An interception warrant may only be issued when this “is necessary in the conduct of
intelligence or counter-intelligence activities” 380. Procedurally, interception requests must be
submitted to federal judges with criminal competence by the Intelligence Secretariat or an
official to whom that power is expressly delegated. Requests must be in writing, justified and

371
    Article 8(1) National Intelligence Act.
372
    Further specified in Annex I, Chapter II, as “intelligence based on the comprehensive analysis of the set of
problems affecting national defence and internal security, which allows for the construction of a general
situational diagnosis of these problems in order to establish strategic guidelines and general objectives in the area
of national defence and internal security”.
373
    Further specified in Annex I, Chapter II, as “intelligence oriented towards knowledge of the deployment and
intelligence activities carried out by individuals, groups or agencies, national or foreign, that may affect national
defence or internal security, each in its institutional sphere”.
374
    Article 8(2) National Intelligence Act and Decree No. 1311/2015, Annex I, Chapter II and III.
375
    Article 4(1), (2) and (3) National Intelligence Act. The overall aim of the legislative framework to establish
clear boundaries for intelligence activities is also reflected in Decree No. 1311/2015, which specifically provides
that the intelligence agencies “must ensure the protection and care of the citizens and not ‘spy on them’”. See
Annex I, Chapter I of Decree No. 1311/2015.
376
    Article 5 National Intelligence Act. For cases of emergency, the same article provides that these activities
“can start, but they need to be immediately reported to the highest authorities in each of the intelligence
agencies.”
377
    In this context, it is important to recall that the Argentinian Supreme Court has ruled that the inviolability of
communications extends to communications via the internet. See CSJN, Halabi, Ernesto c/PEN ley 25.873 and
Decree 1563/04 s/ amparo, judgment of 24 February 2009.
378
    See Article 5 Argentina Digital Law: “Correspondence, understood as any communication that is made
through Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), including traditional postal mail, email or any
other mechanism that induces the user to presume the privacy of itself and the traffic data associated with them,
carried out through telecommunications networks and services, is inviolable. Its interception, as well as its
subsequent registration and analysis, will only proceed at the request of a competent judge”.
379
    Article 18 National Intelligence Act.
380
    Article 18 National Intelligence Act.

                                                         51
must precisely indicate the telephone number(s) or e-mail address(es) or any other
facilities/means, intended to be intercepted or collected 381. As explained above (see section
2.1.1), once approved, the interception may only be conducted by or at the request of the
Legal Assistance Directorate for Complex and Organised Crime, a subsidiary body of the
Supreme Court 382. An interception warrant may be granted for a period no longer than sixty
days, a period which automatically expires unless it is extended by the judge (or the
respective Chamber in the event of a refusal at first instance) when necessary to complete the
ongoing investigation, and such an extension may only be for up to sixty days 383. After the
expiry of the time-limit for the initial collection established by judicial order, another judicial
order must be issued to determine whether the retention should be prolonged or whether the
data should be destroyed 384.

The role of the judge in assessing the request for an interception warrant is essentially to
verify whether the warrant sought is reasonable in light of the facts put forward. This follows
from guidelines, issued by the Supreme Court, on the interception of communications (see
section 2.2.1) 385. These guidelines, which address all judicial bodies, clarify that the
interception of communications is “an exceptional measure that may only be authorised with a
restrictive approach” and that the warrant authorising the interception must be “well founded”
and “may not granted on the basis of generic terms.” Moreover, based on settled case-law of
the Supreme Court and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, any interference with the
inviolability of communications must be provided for by law, pursue a legitimate aim and
comply with the requirements of suitability, necessity and proportionality 386.

Lastly, violations of the above-mentioned rules are subject to criminal sanctions. Those who,
in the permanent or transitory development of the tasks regulated by the National Intelligence
Act, “unduly intercept, seize or divert telephonic, postal, telegraphic or fax communications
or any other type of information, archive, record and/or private documents whose reading is
not authorised nor accessible to the public, and that have not been addressed to them” may be
punished by three to ten years of imprisonment and professional disqualification for twice that
time 387. The same sentence is incurred by any official or civil servant who carries out
intelligence activities prohibited by Laws No 23.554 (National Defence), Law 24.059
(Internal Security) or the National Intelligence Act 388. Anyone who fails “to destroy or


381
    Article 18 National Intelligence Act.
382
    Article 22 National Intelligence Act. Court orders for the interception of telephone communications must be
sent to the Legal Assistance Directorate for Complex and Organised Crime by means of an official letter signed
by the judge, with precise and detailed instructions to guide the interception. The judge must send another
official letter, indicating exclusively the numbers to be tapped, for the Legal Assistance Directorate for Complex
and Organised Crime to attach it to the request to be sent to the telephone service company responsible for
carrying out the interception.
383
    Article 19 National Intelligence Act.
384
    Articles 19 and 20 National Intelligence Act.
385
    Agreement 17/2019. As explained earlier, Agreement 17/2019 is set of guidelines concerning the interception
of communications, issued by the Supreme Court in its capacity as head of the Argentinian judiciary, and
addressed to all judicial bodies.
386
    Supreme Court, Halabi, Ernesto c/ PEN law 25,873 and decree 1563/04 on an amparo complaint, case
number 332:111, judgment of 24 February 2009, recital 25; Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Escher and
Others v. Brazil, Series C 200, judgment of 6 July 2009, paragraph 116, and its citation of the case of Tristan
Donoso vs Panama, Series C 193, judgment of 27 January 2009, paragraph 56.
387
    Articles 42 National Intelligence Act.
388
    Article 43ter National Intelligence Act.

                                                       52
eliminate the records of wiretaps, copies of postal, cable and fax interceptions or of any other
element that accounts for the interceptions, recordings or diversions” after having been
compelled to do so by judicial order or otherwise incurs a prison sentence from two to six
years and professional disqualification for twice that time 389.

        2.3.2    Further use of the information collected

The processing of personal data by the AFI and DINICRI is subject to the LPDP (see sections
2.1 and 2.3.1). In addition, the National Intelligence Act sets out specific safeguards for the
storage of data collected by the intelligence agencies. It stipulates that “data which, once
stored, is not used for the purposes laid down by this Law, is destroyed” and prohibits the
storage of data in intelligence databases “for reasons of race, religious faith, private actions,
political opinion, membership of or membership of advocacy, social, human rights, trade
unions, community, cooperatives, care, cultural or labour organisations, as well as their lawful
activity in any sphere” 390.

With respect to the further sharing of data with other entities (within or outside Argentina),
the National Intelligence Act and the LPDP (which applies to intelligence services, as
explained in section 2.1) impose specific limitations. Based on Article 11 LPDP, personal
data collected for national security purposes may only be shared with other public authorities
for purposes directly related to the legitimate interests of the original controller and the
recipient, subject to the conditions and safeguards described in section 2.2.2. Furthermore, the
National Intelligence Act provides that the disclosure or dissemination of personal data,
acquired by intelligence agencies in the course of their duties, requires a judicial order and a
presidential authorisation pursuant to Article 16 of the Act 391, except when the disclosure or
dissemination is provided for in a legal provision 392.

Based on the LPDP, the transfer of any type of personal data to third countries or international
organisations which do not provide adequate levels of protection, is prohibited, subject to
limited exceptions (e.g., when the transfer is made for international cooperation purposes
between intelligence agencies in the fight against organized crime, terrorism and drug-
trafficking) 393. However, as explained above (see section 1.1.), these exceptions must be
interpreted restrictively. Falling within the scope of one of these exceptions is not sufficient to
ensure the lawfulness of the transfer; all the data protection principles, obligations and rights
of the LPDP must be always complied with.

        2.3.3    Oversight

The activities of Argentinian national security authorities are supervised by different bodies.

389
    Articles 43 National Intelligence Act.
390
    Article 16 sexies National Intelligence Act.
391
    Article 16 National Intelligence Act provides, in so far relevant here: “Access to such information shall be
authorised in each case by the President of the Nation or by the official to whom that power is expressly
delegated, subject to the exceptions provided for in this Law”.
392
    Article 16 quáter National Intelligence Act and Article 3 Decree No. 950/2002. According to explanations
received, this does not hinder the sharing of information between intelligence services and between intelligence
services and other public authorities. For example, Article 15 of Law No. 23.544 requires the AFI to provide the
Ministry of Defence with the information and intelligence necessary to contribute to the production of strategic
military intelligence.
393
    Article 12 LPDP.

                                                      53
First, the AAIP oversees the activities of the AFI and DINICRI, as provided for in the LPDP
and the National Intelligence Act. This oversight follows similar conditions as in a law
enforcement context and for public authorities in general, as detailed in Section 2.2.3.

Second, parliamentary oversight in the area of national security is carried out by the
Bicameral Commission for the Audit of Intelligence Bodies and Intelligence Activities394.
This Commission was established in 2001 by the National Intelligence Act as an independent
review mechanism composed of officials from the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate 395. It
is charged with supervising the bodies belonging to the National Intelligence System, with a
view to oversee that their operation strictly complies with the constitutional, legal and
regulatory requirements 396. To perform its oversight role, the Bicameral Commission may
initiate ex officio investigations 397. Its oversight activities furthermore include (1) studying,
analysing and assessing the execution of the National Intelligence Plan (2) studying the
Annual Intelligence Activities Report 398 (3) receiving any explanations and reports deemed
appropriate from government ministers (4) giving opinions on any draft legislation linked to
intelligence activities, and (5) receiving complaints from natural and legal persons about
abuses and wrongdoings committed by intelligence agencies 399.

The Bicameral Commission has, in principle, access to all the information or documentation it
requests from the bodies that make up the National Intelligence System 400.The Bicameral
Commission furthermore has the power to request classified reports containing a list of
interceptions carried out within a specified period. It may request such reports from the Legal
Assistance Directorate for Complex and Organised Crime, its representatives within the
country and from telecom operators active in Argentina, for the purpose of controlling the
legality of such interceptions 401.

The Bicameral Commission submits annual reports with recommendations to the National
Executive and the Parliament. These annual reports evaluate the activities, performance, and
organization of the National Intelligence System with regard to the National Intelligence
Plan 402. In 2018, the Bicameral Commission wrote a detailed opinion on a new legislative
proposal to amend the National Intelligence Act 403. In addition, in 2020-2021 the Bicameral
Commission conducted an in-depth investigation into certain alleged breaches by the AFI
during the period of 2016 to 2019. Its extensive report of 20 April 2021 included proposals for


394
    Comisión Bicameral de Fiscalización de los Organismos y Actividades de Inteligencia del Honorable
Congreso de la Nación, created by Article 31 National Intelligence Act.
395
    Article 31 National Intelligence Act.
396
    Article 32 National Intelligence Act.
397
    Article 32 National Intelligence Act.
398
    This is a secret report, drawn up each year by the Intelligence Secretariat and forwarded to the Bicameral
Commission within ten days of the beginning of the Parliament’s ordinary session. See Article 33(2) National
Intelligence Act.
399
    Article 33 National Intelligence Act.
400
    Article 32, 35 and 37(2) National Intelligence Act. Such access must be authorized in each case by the
President or an official specially appointed to do so, Article 16 and 32 National Intelligence Act, Article 20
Decree 950/2002.
401
    Article 34 National Intelligence Act.
402
    Article 33(4) National Intelligence Act.
403
                    The                   opinion               is                 accessible               at:
https://www.leyes.congreso.gob.pe/Documentos/2016_2021/Dictamenes/Proyectos_de_Ley/02468DC14MAY2
0180611.pdf

                                                      54
structural reforms within the National Intelligence System such as the creation of a whistle-
blower system 404.

Finally, SIGEN (see section 2.2.3) has the possibility to control the administrative processes
and the budget execution of the AFI’s public funds 405.

        2.3.4    Redress

The Argentinian system offers different avenues to obtain redress, including compensation for
damages.

First, individuals have a right to obtain access to and rectification or deletion (“suppression”)
of their data held by the AFI or DINICRI under the LPDP, subject to the same conditions as
described in section 2.2.4.

Second, any individual may lodge a complaint with the AAIP in respect of any matter relating
to the handling of personal information by the AFI or DINICRI, in the same way as described
in section 2.2.4.

Third, judicial redress may be sought via a constitutional habeas data action against the AFI,
or DINICRI, subject to the same conditions as described in section 2.2.4. For instance, in the
Supreme Court case of R. P., R. D. c/Estado Nacional – Secretaría de Inteligencia del Estado,
the complainant initiated a habeas data action against the former State Intelligence Service
(SIDE) to gain access to information gathered by SIDE from 1961 to 1973, which he
considered necessary to receive pension entitlements from the national administration
(ANSES). The Supreme Court considered that information processed by intelligence
organisations does not per se constitute classified information, and that the judiciary is
authorised to have access to the documents in question and to verify whether the decision to
refuse the requested access is lawful 406.

Fourth, the same judicial avenues as the ones described in section 2.2.4 (i.e., a claim for the
compensation of damages, preventative action, generic action, action for annulment) are also
available against the AFI and DINICRI.

Finally, once all national law remedies are exhausted, data subjects may bring their case
before the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights.




404
    Informe Comisión Bicameral de Fiscalización de los Organismos y Actividades de Inteligencia, Espionaje
Ilegal 2016-2019, available at: https://www4.hcdn.gob.ar/comisiones/especiales/cbinteligencia/Informe
Comision Bicameral Inteligencia 2021-04-20.pdf. Several Decrees aimed at reforming the Federal Intelligence
Agency (Decretos Nº 540/20, 987/20, 359/21, 832/21, 295/22 and 654/22) were adopted as a follow-up to the
opinion.
405
    See Decree No. 52/2019, available at: https://www.argentina.gob.ar/normativa/nacional/decreto-52-2019-
333546/actualizacion.
406
    Supreme Court, R. P., R. D. c/ Estado Nacional - Secretaría de Inteligencia del Estado, case number 334:445,
judgement of 19 April 2011. According to information received from the Argentinian authorities, as part of the
reform of the Argentinian intelligence services mentioned in section 2.3, the amount of information that is
classified as confidential has been “reduced to the indispensable minimum”.

                                                      55
                                                III. CANADA

1. RULES APPLYING TO THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA

    1.1. Relevant developments in the data protection framework of Canada

On 20 December 2001, the European Commission adopted its adequacy decision on the
adequate protection of personal data provided by the Canadian Personal Information
Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA) 407. The decision covers transfers of
personal data from the EU to recipients in Canada that are subject to PIPEDA. The Article 29
Working Party adopted its opinion on 20 January 2001 408.

Since the Commission adopted its adequacy finding in 2001, PIPEDA has been amended on
five occasions; by the Anti-Terrorism Act (S.C. 2001, c. 41), the Public Safety Act (which
entered into force in 2004, S.C. 2004, c. 15), the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Act
(S.C. 2005, c. 46), Canada’s Anti-Spam Legislation (S.C. 2010, c. 23) and the Digital Privacy
Act (S.C. 2015, c. 32). Moreover, further interpretations and clarifications have been provided
by the courts and the federal data protection authority (the Office of the Privacy
Commissioner, OPC).

In June 2022, the Canadian government introduced a bill (Bill C-27) in the Canadian
Parliament to enact the Consumer Privacy Protection Act, the Personal Information and Data
Protection Tribunal Act and the Artificial Intelligence and Data Act 409. The bill is currently
being examined by the House of Commons of the Canadian Parliament, after which it will go
to the Senate. The proposed Consumer Privacy Protection Act would amend PIPEDA in
several ways, e.g., by codifying certain clarifications provided over the years by courts and
the OPC (for instance on the validity and modalities of consent, requirements for the
legitimacy/lawfulness of data processing, the right to deletion and international data transfers)
and by further strengthening the powers of the OPC.

PIPEDA has a specific scope of application, which has been extended several times since the
adoption of the adequacy decision 410. Currently, PIPEDA applies to the collection, use and
disclosure of personal information by an organization 411 in the course of a commercial

407
    Commission Decision 2002/2/EC of 20 December 2001 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the adequate protection of personal data provided by the Canadian Personal
Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act, OJ L 2, 4.1.2002, p. 13-16.
408
     Opinion 2/2001 (WP39), available at https://ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-
recommendation/files/2001/wp39_en.pdf.
409
                                                    Available                                                   at:
https://lop.parl.ca/sites/PublicWebsite/default/en_CA/ResearchPublications/LegislativeSummaries/441C27E.
410
    After its adoption on 13 April 2000, PIPEDA entered into force in three stages. As from 1 January 2001, it
applied to personal information, other than personal health information, that a federal work, undertaking or
business, collected, used or disclosed in the course of commercial activity. It also applied to all organisations
disclosing information outside a province or outside Canada and to employee data handled by a federal work,
undertaking or business. As of 1 January 2002, it also covered the handling of personal health information by the
abovementioned organisations. Finally, as of 1 January 2004, PIPEDA applies to any organisation that collects,
uses or discloses personal information in the course of a commercial activity, whether or not it is a federally
regulated business (Section 4(1) PIPEDA).
411
    PIPEDA applies to ‘organisations’ and does not distinguish between ‘controllers’ and ‘processors’. Instead,
Principle 1 provides that organisations remain responsible for information in their possession or custody (Section
4.1.3 of Schedule 1 PIPEDA). This includes information that has been transferred to a third party for processing.
Where information is ‘transferred’ to a third party, the latter may only use that information for the purposes for

                                                        56
activity 412, as well as to the processing of personal information about employees of (or
applicants for employment with) an organisation that is federally regulated 413. Since 2015,
PIPEDA also applies to processing of personal information by the World Anti-Doping
Agency 414. It does not apply to personal information handled by public authorities, non-profit
organisations (unless they handle personal information for commercial purposes), individuals
(to the extent they handle the information for purely personal or domestic purposes), or
employee information of non-federally regulated organisations 415. In addition, an amendment
in 2015 introduced a specific exception for the processing of business contact information
(e.g., name, title, work address, work contact details) solely for the purpose of communicating
or facilitating communication with the individual in relation to their employment, business or
profession 416. This exception only applies to a limited number of situations (e.g., to use the
work e-mail address of a lawyer to obtain legal advice) and cannot be relied upon to use
information for different purposes (e.g., to use that same work e-mail address for marketing
purposes) 417.

As regards its territorial scope of application, PIPEDA provides for the possibility to exempt
organisations or activities from its application with respect to the processing that occurs solely

which it was originally collected by the transferring entity. Organisations are required to use contractual or other
means to provide a comparable level of protection while the information is being processed by the third party.
According to guidance from the OPC, ‘comparable level of protection’ does not mean that the protections must
be the same but generally equivalent (see https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/airports-and-
borders/gl_dab_090127/). The primary means by which such protection may be ensured is through a contract
(other means could include internal policies and safeguards applied throughout a corporate group, see PIPEDA
case        summary          #2006-333,         available       at:      https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-
decisions/investigations/investigations-into-businesses/2006/pipeda-2006-333/). The guidance furthermore
explains that organisations must be satisfied that third parties have policies and processes in place, including
training and effective security measures, to ensure that the information is properly protected. Organisations
should also have the right to audit and inspect how the third party handles and stores personal information.
412
    In accordance with Section 2(1) PIPEDA, an organisation includes an association, a partnership, a person and
a trade union. A commercial activity is defined as “any particular transaction, act or conduct or any regular
course of conduct that is of a commercial character, including the selling, bartering or leasing of donor,
membership or other fundraising lists”.
413
    PIPEDA refers to a federal work, undertaking or business, i.e., “any work, undertaking or business that is
within the legislative authority of Parliament”, see Section 2(1) PIPEDA. This includes a work, undertaking or
business in connection with navigation and shipping; railway, canal, telegraph or other work that connects
provinces; a line of ships that connects provinces; a ferry between provinces or between a province and third
country; aerodromes, aircraft or a line of air transportation; a radio broadcasting station; a bank or authorised
foreign bank; a work situated in a province but declared by Parliament to be for the general advantage of Canada
or two or more provinces; a work, undertaking or business outside the exclusive legislative authority of the
provinces and a work, undertaking or business to which federal laws under the Oceans Act apply.
414
    Schedule 4 and Section 4(1.1) PIPEDA.
415
    Section 4(2)(a) and (b) PIPEDA. In addition, PIPEDA does not apply to the collection, use or disclosure of
personal information for purely journalistic, artistic or literary purposes (Section 4(2)(c) PIPEDA). This is a
limited exception, intended to protect freedom of expression under the Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms. The balance between privacy and freedom of expression is ensured through other standards, such as
Ethics Guidelines of the Association of Journalists, which rely on principles such as accuracy, fairness, respect
for the right to privacy, transparency, etc. (see the Ethics Guidelines, available at: https://caj.ca/ethics-guidelines
and the Principles for Ethical Journalism, available at https://caj.ca/images/downloads/Ethics/principles.pdf).
416
    Section 4.01 PIPEDA.
417
       See e.g.,Case Summary #2019-006, available at: https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-
decisions/investigations/investigations-into-businesses/2019/pipeda-2019-006/. In this case, a publishing
company had collected, used and shared the contact details of an individual that was presented on the website of
a non-profit organisation as a contact point. The OPC found that this information did not constitute business
contact information, but personal information subject to PIPEDA, as it was included on the non-profit’s website
for handling general inquiries from the public (not for the sole purpose of communicating or facilitating
communication with the individual in relation to his employment, business or profession).

                                                          57
within a province that has passed legislation deemed to be substantially similar to PIPEDA 418.
In that case, this provincial legislation applies to the processing of personal information taking
place within that province. Any processing that takes place across provincial or international
borders or that is carried out by federally regulated businesses (regardless of where it takes
place) remains subject to PIPEDA. So far, Quebec, Alberta and British Columbia have been
found to have substantially similar (comprehensive) privacy legislation, while the health-
related privacy laws of Ontario, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Newfoundland and
Labrador have been declared substantially similar to PIPEDA with respect to health
information. However, this does not affect personal data transferred from the EU/EEA to
Canada on the basis of the adequacy decision; data transfers from the EU/EEA under the
adequacy decision are considered cross-border data transfers, which are subject to PIPEDA.

While the definition of personal information under PIPEDA (i.e., “information about an
identifiable individual” 419) has not changed since the adoption of the adequacy decision, this
notion has been further interpreted by the OPC, case law and guidance. In particular, it has
been clarified the definition of personal information must be given a broad and expansive
interpretation 420, similar to the one under Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR) 421, taking into
account whether there is a serious possibility that an individual could be identified through the
use of that information, either alone or in combination with other Information 422. For
example, a decision of the OPC has clarified that de-identified information remains personal
information if it is still possible to link the data back to an identifiable individual 423.

Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, the main data protection principles provided by
PIPEDA, which are closely aligned to the corresponding principles under EU data protection
rules, have not changed. This is the case for the principle of purpose limitation (subsection
5(3)), purpose specification (Principle 4.2 of Schedule 1 PIPEDA) data accuracy (Principle
4.6 of Schedule 1), data minimisation (Principles 4.4 and 4.5, of Schedule 1), data retention
(Principle 4.5 of Schedule 1), security (Principle 4.7 of Schedule 1), accountability (Principle
4.1 of Schedule 1), and transparency (Principle 4.8 of Schedule 1). At the same time, several
aspects of the legal framework have been further clarified and developed, either through
legislative amendments or through case law and/or guidance of the OPC.


418
    The procedural aspects for such a determination are laid down in the “Process for the Determination of
Substantially Similar Provincial Legislation by the Governor in Council”, published by Industry Canada. It is
done by the Governor in Council, based on a recommendation from the Minister of Industry, which first has to
consult the OPC. For a provincial law to be considered substantially similar to PIPEDA, three requirements need
to be fulfilled: the law must (1) incorporate all 10 principles of Schedule 1 (which set out the data protection
principles, individual rights and obligations for controllers/processors); (2) provide for an independent and
effective oversight and redress mechanism with powers to investigate; and (3) restrict the collection, use and
disclosure to purposes that are appropriate or legitimate.
419
    Section 2(1) PIPEDA.
420
    Examples of types of information that are considered to be personal information include, bank account
numbers, credit reports, biometric information, GPS tracking information, IP addresses, patient records, etc. See
https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/privacy-laws-in-canada/the-personal-information-protection-and-
electronic-documents-act-pipeda/pipeda-compliance-help/pipeda-interpretation-bulletins/interpretations_02/.
421
    Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).
422
    Gordon v. Canada (Health) (2008) FC 258.
423
         Case      summary       2009-018,       available     at:    https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-
decisions/investigations/investigations-into-businesses/2009/pipeda-2009-018/.

                                                       58
In particular, the requirements for lawfulness of processing have been further strengthened in
different ways. As a general principle, PIPEDA requires the knowledge and consent of the
individual for any collection, use or disclosure of personal information 424, although PIPEDA
also contains certain exceptions 425 (see below). The requirements for valid consent have been
reinforced by an amendment to PIPEDA introduced by the Digital Privacy Act (2015) 426, by
making clear that that consent is only valid if it is reasonable to expect that individuals
understand the nature, purpose and consequences of the collection, use or disclosure of the
personal information to which they are consenting 427. According to the guidance of the
OPC 428, this requires that individuals are provided with information on what personal
information will be collected, the purpose of processing, the third parties with whom
information will be shared and possible (negative) consequences for the individual (e.g.,
financial loss, negative effects on credit records, etc.). Organisations must provide this
information in an easily accessible form, provide individuals with a clear and easily accessible
choice (not) to consent, obtain new consent when making relevant changes to their privacy
practices and allow consent to be withdrawn.

Moreover, case law and guidance have provided further clarifications on the form and way
consent should be obtained, which may vary, depending on the circumstances and type of
information 429. A Supreme Court decision in 2016 confirmed that, in determining whether
consent must be expressly given, organisations need to take into account the sensitivity of the
information and the reasonable expectations of the individual, both of which depend on the
specific circumstances of the case 430. OPC guidance and decisions specify that express
consent is, in principle, the most appropriate form in any circumstance 431 and must in any


424
    Principle 4.3, Schedule 1, PIPEDA. PIPEDA does not apply a general concept of data ‘processing’, but rather
distinguishes between the collection, use and disclosure of personal information.
425
    These exceptions typically correspond to situations where it is impossible in practice to obtain consent and
the processing is urgently necessary in the interest of the individual (e.g., in the context of an emergency), or
where knowledge of the individual would undermine certain specific purposes of processing (e.g., in the context
of a criminal investigation). For example, collection without consent is allowed where it is clearly in the interest
of the individual and consent cannot be obtained in a timely way (paragraph 7(1)(a); see also the corresponding
ground for use in paragraph 7(2)(d); or where knowledge or consent would compromise the availability or
accuracy of the information and the collection, use or disclosure takes place for the purpose of investigating a
breach of an agreement or a violation of the law (paragraphs 7(1)(b),7(2)(d) and 7(3)(d.1) PIPEDA). Similarly,
organisations can for instance use and disclose personal information in the context of an emergency that
threatens the life, health or security of an individual (paragraph 7(2)(b) and 7(3)(e) PIPEDA) and may disclose it
to collect a debt owed by the individual, to comply with a subpoena or warrant, or to provide it to a specialised
institution for the purpose of the conservation of records of historic or archival importance (paragraph 7(3)(b),
(c) and (g) PIPEDA).
426
    PIPEDA already required that organisations make a reasonable effort to ensure that individuals are informed
about the purposes for which the information will be used (Schedule 1, Principle 4.3.2 PIPEDA).
427
    Section 6.1 PIPEDA.
428
                Available               at:            https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/collecting-personal-
information/consent/gl_omc_201805/.
429
    For example, an application form may be used to seek consent, collect information, and inform the individual
of the use that will be made of the information. By completing and signing the form, the individual is giving
consent; a checkoff box may be used to allow individuals to request that their names and addresses not be given
to other organisations; individuals who do not check the box are assumed to consent to the transfer of this
information to third parties; consent may be given orally when information is collected over the telephone; or
consent may be given at the time that individuals use a product or service (Schedule 1, Principle 4.3.7 PIPEDA).
430
    Supreme Court of Canada, Royal Bank of Canada v. Trang, 2016.
431
      See https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/privacy-laws-in-canada/the-personal-information-protection-
and-electronic-documents-act-pipeda/pipeda-compliance-help/pipeda-interpretation-

                                                        59
event be obtained when the information is sensitive (see below on the notion of sensitivity
under PIPEDA), when the processing is outside of the reasonable expectations of the
individual (e.g., certain sharing of information with a third party, tracking of location), or
when it creates a meaningful risk of significant harm (which is to be understood broadly,
including both material and reputational impact). Implied or opt-out consent are only allowed
in limited and strictly defined circumstances 432.

Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, some additional exceptions to consent have been
introduced, which may permit the collection, use or disclosure of personal information
without obtaining consent from the individual for specific and circumscribed purposes 433. For
example, the Digital Privacy Act (2015) introduced exceptions that allow collection and use
(1) when personal information is contained in a witness statement and the collection or use is
necessary to assess, process or settle an insurance claim; and (2) when personal information
was produced by the individual in the course of employment, business or profession and the
collection or use is consistent with the purpose for which the information was produced 434. In
addition, exceptions were introduced allowing the use and disclosure of personal information
in the context of prospective and completed business transactions (e.g., in case of a merger or
sale of business, but not in case of business transactions where the primary purpose or result is
the purchase, sale or other acquisition or disposition, or lease, of personal information 435)
under certain conditions 436. Finally, other exceptions were added to permit federal works,


bulletins/interpretations_07_consent/ and the cases cited there (in particular PIPEDA Case Summary #2003-192
and #2003-203.
432
    For example, the OPC has accepted that individuals had given implied consent to the disclosure of their data
in the context of litigation or dispute resolution, where personal data had been disclosed by an organisation to
obtain expert advice of a third party for the purpose of defending itself (PIPEDA Case Summary #2009-003 and
#2009-016). The OPC has also clarified that an opt-out mechanism may be acceptable where: (1) The personal
information is demonstrably non-sensitive in nature and context; (2) The context in which information is shared
is limited and well-defined as to the nature of the personal information to be used or disclosed and the extent of
the intended use or disclosure; (3) the purposes of processing are stated in a reasonably clear and understandable
manner and brought to the individual's attention at the time the personal information is collected; (4) the
organisation obtains consent for the use or disclosure at the time of collection, or informs individuals of the
proposed use or disclosure, and offers the possibility to opt out, at the earliest opportunity; and (5) the
organisation establishes a convenient procedure for opting out, with the opt-out taking effect immediately and
prior to any use or disclosure of personal information for the proposed use or disclosure. See:
https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/privacy-laws-in-canada/the-personal-information-protection-and-
electronic-documents-act-pipeda/pipeda-compliance-help/pipeda-interpretation-
bulletins/interpretations_07_consent/.
433
     To the extent that these exceptions concern obligations to provide personal information to criminal law
enforcement or national security authorities, or to cooperate on a voluntary basis, they are described in
paragraphs 7(3)(c.1), 7(3)(c.2), 7(3)(d) and 7(d.1 – 4), see sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2.
434
    Sections 7(1)(b.1) and (b.2), as well as Section 7(2)(b.1) and (b.2) PIPEDA.
435
    Section 7.2(4) PIPEDA.
436
    In particular, organisations that are parties to a prospective business transaction (Section 7.2(1) PIPEDA) may
use and disclose personal information if (1) they have entered into an agreement that requires the organisation
that receives the information to use and disclose the information solely for purposes related to the transaction, to
protect the information by security safeguards appropriate to the sensitivity of the information and to return or
destroy the information within a reasonable time if the transaction does not proceed; and (2) the personal
information is necessary to determine whether to proceed with the transaction and, if the determination is made
to proceed with the transaction, to complete it. Similarly, organisations that are party to the transaction are also
allowed to use and disclose personal information in relation to a completed business transaction (Section 7.2(2)
PIPEDA) if (1) they have entered into an agreement that requires each of them to use and disclose the
information solely for purposes for which it was collected, permitted to be used or disclosed before the
transaction was completed; to protect the information by appropriate security safeguards; and to give effect to a
withdrawal of consent by the individual; (2) the information is necessary for carrying on the business that was

                                                        60
undertakings or businesses to collect, use and disclose personal information if necessary to
establish, manage or terminate an employment relationship and the organisation has informed
the individual thereof 437.

Case law and guidance of the OPC have furthermore elaborated on the requirements for the
legitimacy/lawfulness of data processing, regardless of whether personal information is
processed on the basis of consent, or an exception applies. In particular, PIPEDA provides
that any collection, use or disclosure of personal information may only take place “for
purposes that a reasonable person would consider are appropriate in the circumstances” 438. In
Turner v. Telus Communications Inc, the Federal Court 439 set out a number of factors that
should be taken into account to determine whether a purpose is appropriate, including the
degree of sensitivity of the personal information at issue, whether the processing would be
effective in meeting the organization’s need, whether there are less invasive means of
achieving the same ends at comparable cost and with comparable benefits and whether the
loss of privacy is proportional to the benefits 440. Consequently, organisations are required to
engage in a balancing of interests of the individual and the organisation itself. In order to
determine the appropriateness of a purpose, an organisation must take into account the
particular facts surrounding the collection, use and disclosure.

Another area of the Canadian data protection regime that has developed since the adoption of
the adequacy decision concerns the requirements with respect to security safeguards. In 2015,
a mandatory data breach notification requirement was introduced, which entered into force on
1 November 2018. Organisations are now required to report breaches to the OPC and
concerned individuals, if it is reasonable in the circumstances to believe that the breach
creates a real risk of significant harm to an individual 441. To determine whether that is the
case, organisations have to take into account factors such as the sensitivity of the personal
information, the probability that the information has been, is being or will be misused, etc.442.
Organisations must provide the notification as soon as feasible after determining that the
breach has occurred 443, maintain a record of every breach 444 and provide such records to the
Privacy Commissioner upon request. Deliberately failing to report a breach or maintain data
breach records are offences subject to fines 445.

PIPEDA requires organizations to be accountable for personal information under their control
and sets out a number of obligations in this regard. Guidance developed by the OPC has also



the object of the transaction; and (3) one of the parties notifies the individual, within a reasonable time after the
transaction is completed, of the disclosure of his/her information.
437
    Section 7.3 PIPEDA.
438
       Section 5(3) PIPEDA. See also https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/collecting-personal-
information/consent/gd_53_201805/.
439
    The Federal Court is Canada’s first instance court with jurisdiction over federal matters. Its decisions can be
appealed before the Federal Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court of Canada.
440
    Turner et al v. Telus Communications Inc., 2005 FC 1601.
441
     Section 10.1(1) and 10.1(3) PIPEDA. Significant harm includes bodily harm, humiliation, damage to
reputation or relationships, loss of employment, business or professional opportunities, financial loss, identity
theft, negative effects on the credit record and damage to or loss of property (Section 10.1(7) PIPEDA).
442
    Section 10.1(8) PIPEDA.
443
    Section 10.1(3) and (6) PIPEDA.
444
    Section 10.3(1)-(2) PIPEDA.
445
    Section 28 PIPEDA.

                                                         61
further clarified how the accountability requirements of PIPEDA should be implemented446,
for instance by developing privacy management programs, appointing privacy officers or
offices, keeping records and establishing internal reporting mechanisms, conducting internal
audit and assurance programs to monitor compliance, developing personal information
inventories, conducting risk assessments and developing training and education programs.

As regards the processing of special categories of data, PIPEDA does not provide for a closed
listed of categories that are subject to additional protections. Instead, PIPEDA considers any
information as potentially sensitive, depending on the circumstances and context in which it is
collected/used/disclosed. This has the potential to apply additional protections to a broader
range of personal information depending on the circumstances. Since the adequacy decision,
the OPC and the courts have considered the question of sensitivity in a variety of cases. In
2022, the OPC consolidated existing case law and OPC decisions in an interpretation bulletin
clarifying that certain types of information will generally be considered sensitive because of
the specific risks to individuals when said information is collected, used or disclosed. This
includes information such as health and financial data, ethnic and racial origins, political
opinions, genetic and biometric data, an individual’s sex life or sexual orientation, and
religious/philosophical beliefs 447. Such information is subject to specific requirements as
regards the form and way in which consent is obtained (see earlier) and the security measures
to be put in place 448.

As regards individual rights, there have been several developments in the Canadian legal
framework since the adoption of the adequacy decision. PIPEDA continues to provide
individuals with rights of access 449 and correction, and, while PIPEDA in principle does not
create a separate right to deletion 450, the OPC has indicated that a combination of provisions
may create rights for individuals/obligations for organisations to delete personal
information 451. For example, the OPC considers that, where individuals withdraw consent 452,


446
      See https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/privacy-laws-in-canada/the-personal-information-protection-
and-electronic-documents-act-pipeda/pipeda-compliance-help/pipeda-compliance-and-training-
tools/gl_acc_201204/#f and the additional guidance mentioned there.
447
      See https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/privacy-laws-in-canada/the-personal-information-protection-
and-electronic-documents-act-pipeda/pipeda-compliance-help/pipeda-interpretation-
bulletins/interpretations_10_sensible/. Other types of data, e.g., trade union membership, may also be considered
sensitive depending on specific circumstances, for instance if their processing leads to a risk of discrimination.
448
    Principle 4.7 of Schedule 1.
449
    Principle 4.9. Since the Commission's adequacy decision was adopted, one additional ground for refusing an
access request was added to PIPEDA in 2005 by the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Act that allows an
organisation to refuse access if the personal information was created for the purpose of a disclosure or
investigation under that Act (paragraph 9(3)(e) PIPEDA). The purpose of this amendment was to protect the
identity of parties in disclosures and investigations about wrongdoing in public bodies.
450
    Principle 4.9.5 stipulates that an individual must be able to challenge the accuracy and completeness of
his/her information and have it amended as appropriate, which may involve the correction, deletion or addition
of information.
451
    According to a draft position on online reputation, the OPC indicated that a combination of principles could
provide for the right to deletion. For example, the right to withdraw consent under Principle 4.3.8 (subject to
certain restrictions) and an organisation’s obligation to destroy personal information that is no longer needed
(Principle 4.5.3), taken together, could provide such a right with respect to information the individual provided.
Likewise, for information provided by others, the OPC is of the view that, under Principle 4.9.5, individuals
should be provided a mechanism by which demonstrably inaccurate, incomplete or out of date information can
be challenged and amended. The OPC has also taken the position that soliciting and posting of personal
information for the purpose of incentivizing payment for its removal, would be considered inappropriate under

                                                       62
they should be able to delete information they have themselves provided to an online forum
involved in a commercial activity, such as on a social network. The same reasoning has also
been applied in a broader context, for instance in a case where an individual had requested
deletion of personal information contained in an insurance form 453.

In addition, the entry into force of Canada’s Anti-Spam Legislation (CASL) in 2014
introduced several safeguards that are relevant to the processing of personal information for
direct marketing purposes 454. CASL amended PIPEDA by limiting the possibility for
processing an individual’s electronic address without consent, if it is collected by the use of a
computer program that is designed or marketed primarily for use in generating or searching
for and collecting electronic addresses 455.

With respect to the rules in PIPEDA on international data transfers 456, certain requirements
have been further interpreted and clarified by the OPC. In particular, as regards the sharing of
data with a third party for processing (i.e., a ‘processor’) in a third country 457, the OPC has
clarified that organisations are required to inform individuals of the risk that their personal
information may be lawfully accessed under the laws of the third country. This approach has



subsection       5(3)    of PIPEDA.       Available      at:    https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/about-the-opc/what-we-
do/consultations/consultation-on-online-reputation/pos_or_201801/.
452
    If an individual withdraws consent (which is the most common legal basis under PIPEDA), the information
should be deleted, unless another ground for processing still applies (e.g.,a legal obligation to retain data under
financial       sector     legislation),    see      https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/collecting-personal-
information/consent/gl_omc_201805/ and Draft OPC Position on Online Reputation - Office of the Privacy
Commissioner of Canada .
453
    Case Summary #2017-005 of 10 February 2017, available at: https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-
decisions/investigations/investigations-into-businesses/2017/pipeda-2017-005/. While the concerned company
initially refused, the OPC found that the request from the individual should have been treated as a withdrawal of
consent to the processing. Since there was no legal obligation for the company to continue retaining the
information, it had to be deleted.
454
    More generally, CASL prohibits (and subjects to administrative fines) the sending of commercial electronic
messages without the recipient's consent (including by e-mail, social media and text messages); installing
computer programs without the express consent of the owner of the computer system; making false or
misleading representations to the public in the form of electronic messages; collecting personal information
through the illegal access of a computer system; and collecting and using electronic addresses through computer
programs (address harvesting).
455
    Section 7.1(2) PIPEDA.
456
    While PIPEDA does not distinguish between the sharing of personal information within Canada or the
sending of personal information to other countries, it does regulate how personal information is transferred to
third parties for processing on behalf of the transferring organisation (i.e., to processors) and how personal
information may be disclosed to another organisation (i.e., another controller). Such scenarios may result in
personal information being ‘onward transferred’ to organisations in other countries.
457
    Organisations may also ‘disclose’ personal information to third parties (which would be characterised as
controller to controller). This situation is different from when personal data is ‘transferred’ to another
organisation to conduct processing on the transferring organisation’s behalf (controller to processor), governed
by the accountability principle (Principle 4.1.3) which requires the transferring organisation to use contractual or
other means to ensure a comparable level of protection. As explained earlier, disclosures take place with the
knowledge and consent of the individual, unless one of the specific exceptions apply. While the exceptions most
likely will result in disclosures within Canada, it is possible that a disclosure made pursuant to an exception
could result in a transfer of personal information across international borders. Even in those exceptional cases,
individuals will have been generally informed about the purpose of processing, the third parties with whom data
will be shared and possible risks and other consequences at the time of collection of their data by the Canadian
organisation (Guidelines for obtaining meaningful consent - Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada),
given that the personal information will in principle have been collected from Europe on the basis of consent
(see earlier).

                                                        63
been applied by the OPC in concrete cases that were triggered by complaints from
individuals 458.

    1.2. Oversight, enforcement and redress

The OPC is the independent authority charged with oversight and enforcement of PIPEDA459.
In addition to its power to investigate complaints and undertake audits, it is also tasked with
developing and conducting information programs to foster public understanding, undertaking
research, encouraging organisations to comply with PIPEDA and otherwise promoting the
protection of personal information under PIPEDA 460.

In terms of powers, the OPC may participate in sector- or issue-wide international privacy
sweeps, issue letters of concern to organizations. With respect to its more formal enforcement
authorities, it may ask an organization for access to their internal breach records, carry out
audits 461 and conduct complaint investigations (in response to a complaint or on its own
initiative) 462. In carrying out audits and investigations, the OPC has access to any relevant
information, may summon and enforce the appearance of persons and compel the production
of evidence 463. Upon completing an investigation or audit, the OPC issues a report setting out
the findings and recommendations 464. Since the adoption of the Commission’s adequacy
decision, the powers of the OPC under PIPEDA have been strengthened by amendments
introduced by the Digital Privacy Act in 2015. Following this amendment, the OPC may now
enter into a compliance agreement with an organisation if it believes on reasonable grounds
that an organisation has violated, is about to violate or is likely to violate PIPEDA 465. Such a
compliance agreement may contain any terms the OPC deems necessary to ensure compliance
and is considered a settlement with the concerned organisation. At the same time, compliance
agreements do not preclude individuals from obtaining judicial redress and do not prevent the
prosecution of an offence 466. If an organisation fails to comply with the agreement, the OPC

458
    See for example PIPEDA Case Summary #2007-386, in which the Commissioner found that an organisation
should have made reasonable efforts to inform the individual of the transfer of personal information to a third-
party service provider, see https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-decisions/investigations/investigations-
into-businesses/2007/pipeda-2007-386/. In another case (see PIPEDA case summary #2008-394), the
Commissioner held that a company in Canada that outsources personal information processing to a company that
operates in another country should notify its customers that the information may be available to the government
of that country or its agencies under a lawful order made in that country, see https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-
actions-and-decisions/investigations/investigations-into-businesses/2008/pipeda-2008-394/.
459
    The Office consists of a Privacy Commissioner, assisted by three Deputy Commissioners. The Commissioner
is appointed by the Governor in Council after approval by the Senate and House of Commons for a renewable
term of seven years and may only be removed by the Governor in Council for cause on address of the Senate and
House of Commons (Section 53(1)-(2) Privacy Act). This would require that the House of Commons adopts a
motion for an Address requesting the removal of the Commissioner and that the Senate unites with the House in
that Address. The Commissioner must engage exclusively in the duties of his/her office and may not hold any
other public office for reward or engage in any other employment for reward (Section 54(1) Privacy Act).
460
    Section 24 PIPEDA.
461
    Section 18(1) PIPEDA.
462
    Section 11(1) and (2) PIPEDA.
463
    Section 12.1(1) PIPEDA (complaint investigations) and Section 18(1) PIPEDA (audits).
464
    Section 13 PIPEDA (complaint investigations) and Section 19(1) PIPEDA (audits). If the OPC considers that
it is in the public interest to do so, it may make public any information that comes to its knowledge in the
performance or exercise of any of its duties/powers (Section 20(2) PIPEDA). If there is evidence of a criminal
offence, the OPC may report such information to the Attorney General of Canada or a province (Section 20(5)
PIPEDA).
465
    Section 17.1(1) PIPEDA.
466
    Section 17.1(4) PIPEDA.

                                                      64
may apply to the Federal Court to obtain an order requiring the organisation to do so 467. As
explained in more detail below, the OPC actively exercises its powers to enforce compliance
with PIPEDA.

As regards the possibility for individuals to obtain redress, different avenues continue to be
available in the Canadian system. In particular, individuals may turn directly to
organisations 468, file a complaint with the OPC 469 and obtain judicial redress (against
organisations 470 or against the findings of the OPC 471), which may lead to different types of
remedies, including binding orders to bring the handling of personal information in
compliance with PIPEDA and compensation for damages.

Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, the OPC has carried out a number of important
investigations under PIPEDA. Among the most prominent cases are the investigation of a data
breach at Equifax in 2019 (which led to the conclusion of a compliance agreement 472), the use
of facial recognition tools by Clearview in 2021 (which was a joint investigation with
provincial data protection authorities that led to provincial commissioners issuing binding
orders requiring Clearview to stop several practices and delete personal data that was
unlawfully collected 473), the Facebook/Cambridge Analytica scandal (as part of which the




467
    Section 17.2(2) PIPEDA. The OPC has entered into five compliance agreements. To date, it has not had to
seek an order from the Federal Court to enforce any of these agreements.
468
    Principle 4.10, Schedule 1, PIPEDA. Organisations have to put in place procedures to handle complaints and
inquiries (Section 4.10.2 of Schedule 1). All complaints must be investigated and, if they are found to be
justified, an organisation must take appropriate measures, including, if necessary, amending policies and
practices (Section 4.10.4 of Schedule 1).
469
     Section 11(1) PIPEDA. The OPC may attempt to resolve complaints by means of dispute resolution
mechanisms such as mediation and conciliation (Section 12.1(2) PIPEDA.). After investigating a complaint, the
OPC prepares a report with its findings and recommendations, any settlement that was reached, a request to the
organisation to provide notice of action taken to implement the recommendations (if appropriate) and the
recourse for the individual (Section 13 PIPEDA).
470
    After receiving the OPC’s report or being notified of the discontinuation of an investigation, an individual
may apply to the Federal Court for a hearing in respect of any matter in respect of which the complaint was
made, or that is referred to in the OPC’s report (Section 14(1) PIPEDA). The Court conducts a de novo
examination of the case. The OPC may also apply to the Federal Court (with the individual’s consent) or appear
on behalf of the individual (Section 15 PIPEDA). In accordance with Section 16 PIPEDA, the Federal Court
may, in addition to any other remedies, 1) order an organisation to correct its practices to ensure compliance; 2)
order an organisation to publish a notice of any action taken or proposed to correct its practices; and 3) award
damages to the complainant, including for any humiliation that was suffered. Separately, individuals may also be
able claim damages by invoking a tort (e.g., the tort of inclusion upon seclusion), see Jones v. Tsige, 2012
ONCA 32, where the Ontario Court of Appeal concluded that PIPEDA did not preclude the court from
recognising the tort of inclusion upon seclusion.
471
    Individuals and/or organisations may challenge decisions of the OPC pursuant to Section 18.1 of the Federal
Courts Act. The Federal Court may grant relief if it would be satisfied that the Commissioner (1) acted without
jurisdiction, acted beyond its jurisdiction or refused to exercise its jurisdiction; (2) failed to observe a principle
of natural justice, procedural fairness or other procedure that it was required by law to observe; (3) erred in law
in making a decision or an order, whether or not the error appears on the face of the record; (4) based its decision
or order on an erroneous finding of fact that it made in a perverse or capricious manner or without regard for the
material before it; (5) acted, or failed to act, by reason of fraud or perjured evidence; or (6) acted in any other
way that was contrary to law. The Court may order to do any act or thing that was unlawfully refused, delayed or
failed to be carried out, or declare invalid or unlawful, quash or set aside and refer back for determination,
prohibit or restrain, a decision, order, act or proceeding.
472
             See            https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-decisions/investigations/investigations-into-
businesses/2019/pipeda-2019-001/.
473
    See https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-news/news-and-announcements/2021/an_211214/.

                                                         65
OPC applied to the Federal Court in 2020 to seek a binding enforcement order to ensure that
Facebook’s unlawful privacy practices are corrected 474).

Its annual reports to the Parliament also show that the OPC deals with a number of complaints
under PIPEDA on an annual basis: for example, the annual report of 2018-2019 refers to 380
accepted complaints, 178 closed through early resolution and 104 closed through a standard
investigation 475; the report of 2019-2020 to 289 accepted complaints, 221 closed through
early resolution and 97 closed through standard investigation 476; and the report of 2020-2021
to 309 accepted complaints, 210 closed through early resolution and 86 closed through
standard investigation 477.

The OPC has also been very proactive in providing guidance on the interpretation and
application of PIPEDA, including on topics such as the processing of employee data,
biometric data, cloud computing, the development of mobile apps, online behavioural
advertising, the processing of data from children, e-marketing, internet of things, etc. 478.
Moreover, the OPC issued several ‘interpretation bulletins’ that summarise the general
principles that emerge from court decisions and OPC findings, e.g., on the definition of
personal information, accountability, accuracy, transparency and consent 479. The OPC also
developed a number of tools to assist organisations with training and compliance efforts 480,
and provides detailed information on various topics to raise awareness among data subjects
(e.g., specifically targeting certain groups such as parents, teachers and seniors; on mobile
devices; human resource issues; data concerning health, etc.) 481.

Finally, the OPC regularly engages with stakeholders, such as businesses (e.g., through 19
advisory engagements in the period of 2019-2020 and 13 in 2020-2021), and the Parliament
(e.g., with 8 appearances before Parliamentary committees in the period of 2019-2020 and 3
in 2020-2021, and e.g., having reviewed 29 bills, laws and parliamentary studies for privacy
implications during the period of 2019-2020 and 17 in 2020-2021). The OPC also advised the
government and Parliament on the protection of personal data in the context of the response to
the Covid-19 pandemic 482 and has been an active voice in debates about reforms of data
protection legislation at both provincial and federal level 483.


474
     See https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/privacy-laws-in-canada/the-personal-information-protection-
and-electronic-documents-act-pipeda/pipeda-complaints-and-enforcement-process/court_p/na_fb_20200206/.
The litigation before the Federal Court currently remains ongoing.
475
    Available at: https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-decisions/ar_index/201819/ar_201819/.
476
    Available at: https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-decisions/ar_index/201920/ar_201920/.
477
    Available at: https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-decisions/ar_index/202021/ar_202021/#toc5.
478
     Available at: https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/privacy-laws-in-canada/the-personal-information-
protection-and-electronic-documents-act-pipeda/pipeda-compliance-help/issue-specific-guidance-for-
businesses/?Page=1.
479
     Available at: https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/privacy-laws-in-canada/the-personal-information-
protection-and-electronic-documents-act-pipeda/pipeda-compliance-help/pipeda-interpretation-bulletins/.
480
     Available at: https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/privacy-topics/privacy-laws-in-canada/the-personal-information-
protection-and-electronic-documents-act-pipeda/pipeda-compliance-help/pipeda-compliance-and-training-tools/.
481
    Available at https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/for-individuals/.
482
    See e.g., https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-decisions/advice-to-parliament/2020/parl_20200529/.
483
    See e.g.,the interventions of the OPC before the Committee on Institutions of the National Assembly of
Quebec (https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-news/speeches/2020/sp-d_20200924/) and the Special Committee to
review British Colombia’s Personal Information Protection Act (https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-
news/speeches/2021/s-d_20210622/). The OPC also commented several times on proposed legislative reforms at

                                                     66
2. ACCESS TO AND USE OF PERSONAL DATA TRANSFERRED FROM THE
   EUROPEAN UNION BY PUBLIC AUTHORITIES IN CANADA

    2.1. General legal framework

The limitations and safeguards that apply to the collection and subsequent use of personal
information by Canadian public authorities for criminal law enforcement and national security
purposes follow from the overarching constitutional framework, specific laws regulating data
access, as well as the rules that apply to the processing of personal information by the public
sector.

First, access to personal information by Canadian public authorities is governed by general
principles that follow from the Canadian Constitution and have been further developed
through case law. In particular, Section 8 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
(Charter), which is part of the Canadian Constitution, guarantees that “everyone has the right
to be secure against unreasonable search or seizure” 484. This provision protects against
unjustified intrusions on a person’s “reasonable expectation of privacy” 485, which extends to:
personal privacy (i.e., physical/bodily privacy 486), territorial privacy (i.e., of a place, in
particular an individual’s home 487) and informational privacy (i.e., “the claim of individuals
[…] to determine for themselves when, how, and to what extent information about them is
communicated to others” 488).

According to the Supreme Court of Canada, the interception and recording of a private
communication by public authorities constitutes a serious intrusion into privacy rights and

federal level, including of PIPEDA, see e.g., https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-decisions/submissions-
to-consultations/sub_ethi_c11_2105/.
484
    A ‘search’ is any action by a public authority that engages a reasonable expectation of privacy (Hunter et al.
v. Southam Inc. [1984] 2 S.C.R. 145). This includes searching for tangible or intangible items, including spoken
words and electronic data (See e.g., R. v. Morelli, [2010] 1 S.C.R. 253). A ‘seizure’ is the “taking of a thing from
a person by a public authority without that person’s consent” where this interferes with a reasonable expectation
of privacy (R. v. Dyment, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 417 at 431; Quebec (Attorney General) v Laroche, [2002] 3 S.C.R.
708 at para 52). This includes where a person is required to produce information (e.g., R. v. McKinlay Transport
Ltd., [1990] 1 S.C.R. 627 at 642 and R v Marakah, [2017] 2 S.C.R. 59), Obtaining something from a person
other than the one whose rights are affected also constitutes a seizure, e.g., Dyment; R. v. Dersch, [1993] 3
S.C.R. 768. For consent to be valid, it must be fully informed (R. v. Borden, [1994] 3 S.C.R. 145) and
voluntarily given (see e.g., Godbout v. Longueuil (City), [1997] 3 S.C.R. 844 at 72). A third party cannot waive
the reasonable expectation of privacy of another individual by ‘consenting’ to a search or seizure (R v Cole,
2012 and R v Reeves, [2018] 3 S.C.R. 531).
485
    Hunter v. Southam Inc., [1984] 2 S.C.R. 145 at 159; R. v. Gomboc, [2010] 3 S.C.R. 211 at 17, 75. Whether
state action interferes with a reasonable expectation of privacy and therefore constitutes a search or seizure is
determined on the basis of the totality of the circumstances, taking into account (R. v. Edwards, [1996] 1 S.C.R.
128 at 45, affirmed in R v Tessling at para 19. R. v. Cole 2012 SCC 53; R v Patrick, [2009] 1 S.C.R. 579 at para
27.): (1) the subject matter of the search; (2) whether the individual had a direct interest in the subject matter
(which requires the individual to demonstrate that his or her own privacy interest was breached, as opposed to
the interests of third parties, Edwards at 34); (3) whether the individual had a subjective expectation of privacy in
the subject matter (e.g., in case of activities taking place at one’s home (Gomboc, at 25), or with respect to text
messages sent to a known recipient (Jones, at 15; Marakah, at 23); and (4) whether this subjective expectation of
privacy was objectively reasonable. Additional factors drawn from the Supreme Court’s jurisprudence may also
be taken into account, including whether the object was in the hands of third parties (and whether these had an
obligation of confidentiality), the invasiveness of the method of the search (e.g., covert interception of
communications), the nature of the information collected, etc. (see e.g., Cole, at 45; Tessling at 32; Patrick at
27).
486
    R. v. Tessling, at 21.
487
    See e.g., Semayne’s Case, [1558-1774] All E.R. Rep. 62 (1604), at 63.
488
    Tessling at 23.

                                                         67
would (unless all parties to the conversation expressly consent to the recording) be considered
a search within the meaning of Section 8 of the Charter, generally only permissible with prior
judicial authorisation 489. Similarly, personal computers (because of the vast amounts of
information they contain, including intimate correspondence, details of financial, medical and
personal situations, internet browsing histories, etc.) 490 and internet subscriber information (as
it may not only relate to the person’s name or address, but to his or her identity as the source
or possessor of certain information) engage a high level of privacy 491.

To comply with Section 8 of the Charter, a search/seizure must be “reasonable”. In principle,
this requires prior judicial authorisation, when the court is satisfied that “the public’s interest
in being left alone by government must give way to the government’s interest in intruding on
the individual’s privacy in order to advance the goals of law enforcement” 492. For a
warrantless search or seizure, there is therefore a presumption of “unreasonableness,” which
can be rebutted by the relevant public authority by establishing that the search was authorised
by law, the law itself is reasonable 493, and the manner in which the search or seizure takes
place is reasonable 494. If no prior judicial authorisation is required, additional safeguards may
be required, such as after-the-fact notice to the target of the search and record-keeping
requirements 495. Even when a search or seizure is authorised pursuant to a warrant or
reasonable law, it can be found to be in violation of Section 8 because of the manner in which
it is carried out 496. In particular, a search or seizure must be no more intrusive than is
reasonably necessary to achieve its objectives 497.

All laws and government actions at both the federal and provincial levels must conform to the
Charter. As described in more detail in sections 2.2.1 and 2.3.1, the general principles
following from the Charter are reflected in the specific laws that regulate the powers of law
enforcement and national security authorities.

Moreover, the processing of personal information by Canadian federal public authorities
(including federal criminal law enforcement authorities and national security authorities) is
subject to the Privacy Act (R.S.C., 1985, c. P-21) 498. The Act limits the collection of personal
information by federal institutions to what relates directly to their programs or activities and
regulates its use, disclosure and retention 499. It reflects the principles of purpose limitation,
data accuracy, transparency and storage limitation, and provides individuals with a right of

489
    R. v. Duarte [1990] 1 S.C.R. 30 at pages 42-43. Confirmed in Wakeling v United States of America, 2014
SCC 72, [2014] 3 S.C.R. 549.
490
    Morelli at 105; R. v Vu, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 657 at 24, 40-45.
491
    Spencer at 47, 51.
492
    Hunter v Southam at p. 160.
493
    A law authorising an invasion of privacy is reasonable if it strikes a proper balance between the interests of
society and the rights of individuals (see e.g., R. v. Shoker, [2006] 2 S.C.R. 399 at 42-43). Relevant factors to
consider in this context may include whether the law reflects the least intrusive means by which a state interest
can be achieved (see e.g., Goodwin v. British Columbia (Superintendent of Motor Vehicles), [2015] 3 S.C.R.
250 at 65), whether the powers are narrowly targeted (R. v. Chehil, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 220 at 28), and the reliability
of the procedure used (e.g., a method of searching that captures an inordinate number of innocent individuals
cannot be reasonable, Chehil at 51).
494
    R. v. Collins, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 265 at 278.
495
    Tse, at 83-84; Chehil at 58; R. v. Fearon 2014 SCC 77, at 82.
496
    R. v. Genest, [1989] 1 S.C.R. 59; R. v. Cornell, [2010] 2 S.C.R. 142.
497
    R. v Vu, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 657.
498
    Schedule 3 of the Privacy Act.
499
    Sections 4, 7-9 of the Privacy Act.

                                                        68
access to their personal information and a right of correction 500. The processing of personal
information by provincial/territorial authorities (e.g., local criminal law enforcement
authorities) is subject to similar personal information protection laws 501. In particular, these
laws impose limitations on the collection, use and disclosure of personal information, contain
key personal information protection principles (such as transparency, accuracy, security,
storage limitation and purpose limitation) and provide individuals with a right of access and
correction. Moreover, all thirteen provinces and territories have an independent supervisory
authority to oversee compliance and handle complaints.

These general limitations and safeguards can be invoked by individuals before independent
administrative bodies (e.g., the OPC, provincial personal information protection authorities,
the Civilian Review and Complaints Commission for the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and
the National Security and Intelligence Review Agency) and courts to obtain redress (see
sections 2.2.4 and 2.3.4).

      2.2. Access and use by Canadian public authorities for criminal law enforcement
           purposes

In Canada, criminal law enforcement functions are carried out by different authorities. At
federal and territorial 502 levels, these include the federal police force (the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police, RCMP), as well as other bodies with specific competences, such as the
Canada Border Services Agency, the Canada Revenue Agency, the Canadian Food Inspection
Agency and the Competition Bureau. At provincial and municipal levels, criminal law
enforcement functions are carried out by the RCMP or local police and peace officers.
Canadian law imposes a number of limitations on the access and use of personal information
for criminal law enforcement purposes by each of these authorities and provides oversight and
redress mechanisms. The conditions under which such access can take place and the
safeguards applicable to the use of those powers are described in the following sections.

         2.2.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

Personal information transferred under the adequacy decision and processed by Canadian
organisations subject to PIPEDA may be obtained by Canadian criminal law enforcement
authorities by means of investigative measures under statutes providing for law enforcement
access, the primary one being the Criminal Code or on the basis of anti-money laundering and
anti-terrorist financing legislation; or through voluntary disclosures.

The Criminal Code provides Canadian criminal law enforcement authorities (at federal,
provincial and municipal levels) with a legal basis to access personal information held by
commercial operators through searches and seizures, the interception of communications,
accessing tracking and transmission data, and the use of production orders. The Criminal
Code lays down clear and precise rules on the scope and application of these measures,
thereby ensuring that the interference with the rights of individuals will be limited to what is

500
    Sections 5(2), 6, 7, 8, and 12 of the Privacy Act.
501
     For an overview, see https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/about-the-opc/what-we-do/provincial-and-territorial-
collaboration/provincial-and-territorial-privacy-laws-and-oversight/ and the relevant legislation referenced there.
502
    The RCMP is the police force for the three territories (Nunavut, Northwest Territories and Yukon), which do
not have a separate police force.

                                                        69
necessary for a specific criminal investigation and proportionate to the pursued purpose.
Moreover, to exercise any of these powers, prior judicial authorisation is in principle required
(with certain exceptions, e.g., in emergencies, as described in more detail below) 503.

Searches or seizures may be permitted under a search warrant to take place if there are
reasonable grounds to believe 504 that there is anything in a building, receptacle or place for
which a connection with an offence can be established (e.g., anything that will produce
evidence with respect to the commission of an offence) 505. In terms of procedural safeguards,
a search/seizure may as a general rule only take place on the basis of a court-issued
warrant 506. A search of a computer system in order to seize, reproduce or copy data, must be
specifically authorised by the warrant 507. In principle, the person subject to the search is
present when the search is carried out and, where this is not the case, a copy of the warrant is
left to inform the individual. Warrantless searches or seizures may take place if the conditions
for obtaining a warrant exist but there are exigent circumstances that make it impracticable to
obtain a warrant 508. In accordance with case law, this will be the case if there is an “imminent
danger of the loss, removal, destruction or disappearance of the evidence if the search is
delayed” 509 or if there is a degree of urgency that necessitates action by law enforcement 510.

Specific limitations and safeguards apply to the interception of private communications511,
which in principle may only take place in the context of investigations of serious offences 512
and in most cases on the basis of a judicial authorisation. Procedurally, the application for the
authorisation must in principle be signed by the Attorney General of the relevant province or
503
    In addition to the authorities noted (search warrants, production orders, authorizations to intercept private
communications, transmission data recorder warrants, tracking warrants), there is also authority in the Criminal
Code for a judge to issue a general warrant authorizing the use of a certain device, investigative technique or
procedure, other measures that would, if not authorized, constitute an unreasonable search or seizure (Section
487.01(1) of the Criminal Code). Such a warrant may only be issued if the judge is satisfied that a) there are
reasonable grounds to believe that an offence has been or will be committed and that information concerning the
offence will be obtained through the use of the technique, procedure, device or other measure; b) it is in the best
interests of the administration of justice to issue the warrant; and there is no other provision that would provide
for a warrant, authorization or order permitting the technique, procedure, device or other measure. The warrant
must contain terms and conditions to ensure that any search or seizure authorised by the warrant is reasonable in
the circumstances (Section 487.01(3) of the Criminal Code).
504
     According to the Supreme Court, the ‘reasonable grounds to believe’ test is one of ‘credibly based
probability’ or ‘reasonable probability’ (Baron v. R [1993] 1 S.C.R. 416 at paras 54,55). This requires a
subjective and objective assessment of the facts. First, the judge must subjectively believe that there are
reasonable grounds justifying the actions taken and, second, it must be objectively established that reasonable
grounds do in fact exist (i.e., there must be sufficient evidence to support the belief). The totality of the
circumstances should therefore be considered. See R v. Tse 2012 SCC 16 at para. 33, R v. Bernshaw 1995 1
S.C.R. 254 at para. 62, R v. Storrey 1990 1 S.C.R. 241 at paras. 16-17.
505
    This refers to the search warrant in section 487(1) of the Criminal Code.
506
    The application for a warrant and the warrant itself must contain a description of the things to be searched, the
offence in respect of which the search is made, as well as the premise at which the search is to be carried out
(See Form 1 and 5 referred to in the Criminal Code ).
507
    Section 487(2.1) of the Criminal Code. The Supreme Court has confirmed that, because of the significant
amounts of personal information they contain, computers and similar devices may only be searched if
specifically authorised by a warrant. Consequently, a warrant to search a physical location may not implicitly
authorise the search of electronic devices such as computers found at that location. See R. v. Vu, 2013 SCC 60.
508
    Section 487.11 of the Criminal Code.
509
    R v Grant, (1993), 84 C.C.C. (3d) 173 (S.C.C.), at 189.
510
    R v Goncalves, (1993), 81 C.C.C. (3d) 240 (S.C.C.) at 246.
511
    Interception includes listening to, recording or acquiring a communication or acquiring the substance,
meaning of purport thereof (Section 183 of the Criminal Code).
512
    For example, high treason, forgery, endangering the safety of an aircraft, using explosives, participation in
activities of terrorist groups, child pornography, kidnapping, etc. See Section 183 of the Criminal Code.

                                                         70
the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness and submitted to a judge of a
superior court of criminal jurisdiction 513. An authorisation may be issued 514 if it is in the best
interests of the administration of justice and other investigative procedures have been tried
and have failed/are unlikely to succeed or the urgency of the matter is such that it would be
impractical to carry out the investigation of the offence using only other investigative
procedures 515. An interception authorisation is valid for a maximum period of 60 days (one
year for offences related to terrorism or criminal organizations) and may be renewed by the
court once for the same period by a judge if the abovementioned conditions remain
fulfilled 516. Intercepting private communications in violation of the Criminal Code is an
offence liable to imprisonment for a maximum of five years 517.

In terms of additional safeguards, the Criminal Code imposes specific reporting and
transparency requirements. In particular, within 90 days after the end of the authorisation, the
individual that was the object of the interception must be notified in writing and a certification
of that notification must be provided to the court that authorised the interception 518. A longer
period for notification must be specifically requested when applying for authorisation and
may not exceed three years 519. Such extension may only be granted if the investigation of the
offence to which the authorisation relates is ongoing and it is in the interest of justice 520. In
addition, the contents of private communications may only be used as evidence in judicial
proceedings if the accused has been provided with reasonable notice of that intention together
with a transcript of the communication and a statement setting out the time, place, date, and
parties to the communication 521. More generally, the Minister of Public Safety and
Emergency Preparedness is required to issue an annual public report with, inter alia, the
number of applications and authorisations, the number of persons identified in an
authorisation against whom proceedings were commenced, the average period for which
authorisation and renewals were granted, etc. 522

Interception of private communications without a prior judicial authorisation by a police
officer are permitted to take place (in the context of investigations of any offence) in two

513
    Section 185(1) of the Criminal Code. The application must provide detailed information, including on the
offence under investigation, the type of communications to be intercepted and the names, addresses and
occupations of the targeted individuals. Moreover, it must specify whether other investigative procedures have
been tried and have failed or why it appears they are unlikely to succeed or that the urgency of the matter is such
that it would be impractical to carry out the investigation - using only other investigative procedures.
514
    The warrant must itself also specify inter alia a) the offence in respect of which private communications may
be intercepted; b) the type of private communication that may be intercepted; and c) the identity of the persons,
if known, whose private communications are to be intercepted, as well as a general description of the place at
which private communications may be intercepted and the manner of interception that may be used (Section
186(4) of the Criminal Code).
515
    Section 186(1) of the Criminal Code. The latter condition does not have to be fulfilled with respect to an
offence related to terrorism or criminal organisations (Section 186(1.1) of the Criminal Code).
516
    Section 186(6) and (7), and Section 186.1 of the Criminal Code. If the urgency of the situation requires
interception to start before an authorization could be obtained with reasonable diligence in accordance with the
abovementioned procedure, the judge may authorize the interception in writing for a period of up to thirty-six
hours (Section 188(2) of the Criminal Code). Applications for such urgency measures are made to especially
appointed judges for this purpose and are followed up with a regular application under Section 185.
517
    Section 184(1) of the Criminal Code.
518
    Section 196(1) of the Criminal Code.
519
    Section 185(2)-(3) of the Criminal Code.
520
    Section 196(3) of the Criminal Code.
521
    Section 189(5) of the Criminal Code.
522
    Section 195 of the Criminal Code.

                                                        71
exceptional circumstances. First, this may be the case if there are reasonable grounds to
believe that a) the urgency of the situation is such that an authorisation could not, with
reasonable diligence, be obtained; b) the interception is immediately necessary to prevent an
offence that would cause serious harm to any person or to property; and c) either the
originator of the private communication or the person intended to receive it is the person who
would commit the offence or is the (intended) victim 523. In this case, the concerned
individuals must be notified in the same way as was described above 524. Second, a warrantless
interception may take place by an agent of the state if a) either the originator of the
communication or the person intended to receive it has consented to the interception; b) the
authority believes on reasonable grounds that there is a risk of bodily harm to the person who
consented to the interception; and c) the purpose of the interception is to prevent the bodily
harm 525. In that case, the content of the intercepted communications will only be admissible
as evidence in court proceedings for the purposes of proceedings in which actual, attempted or
threatened bodily harm is alleged 526.

In addition to intercepting the content of private communications, criminal law enforcement
authorities may collect transmission data 527 if there are reasonable grounds to suspect that an
offence has been or will be committed and the data will assist in the investigation 528. Such
collection may again only take place on the basis of a court-issued warrant. Case law529
confirmed that such a warrant could be used “either to obtain names and records where the
suspected phone number but not the name of the suspect is known, or alternatively, to produce
the phone number and records, if any, where the police are able to provide the service
provider with the name and address but not the cell phone number of the suspected person for
whom they seek records”.

Similarly, to collect data related to the location of a transaction, individual or thing (tracking
data 530), a warrant must be obtained. Such a warrant may authorise the use of a “tracking
device” (a device, including a computer program, which may be used to obtain or record
tracking data 531 or to transmit it by a means of telecommunication 532) for a maximum period


523
    Section 184.4 of the Criminal Code. This report must also be made available to the Parliament (Section
195(4) of the Criminal Code).
524
    Section 196.1 of the Criminal Code.
525
    Section 184.1(1) of the Criminal Code.
526
    Section 184.1(2) of the Criminal Code.
527
    Defined as “data that (a) relates to the telecommunication functions of dialling, routing, addressing or
signalling; (b) is transmitted to identify, activate or configure a device, including a computer program […], in
order to establish or maintain access to a telecommunication service for the purpose of enabling a
communication, or is generated during the creation, transmission or reception of a communication and identifies
or purports to identify the type, direction, date, time, duration, size, origin, destination or termination of the
communication; and (c) does not reveal the substance, meaning or purpose of the communication” (Section
492.2(6) of the Criminal Code).
528
    Sections 492.1(1) and 492.2(1) of the Criminal Code. The ‘reasonable grounds to suspect’ test engages the
reasonable possibility, rather than probability, of crime. However, the suspicion cannot be so broad that it
becomes a generalized suspicion (e.g., attached to a particular activity or location rather than a specific person).
Whether or not there is a reasonable suspicion depends on the totality of the circumstances. The objective facts
must be indicative of the possibility of criminal behaviour and a nexus must exist between the suspected criminal
conduct and the investigative technique to be used. See R v. Chehil [2013] SCC 49, at paras. 27, 28 and 35-36.
529
    R v. Mahmood [2008] OJ No. 3922, at para. 128.
530
    Section 492.1(8) of the Criminal Code.
531
    Tracking data is defined as “data that relates to the location of a transaction, individual or thing.”
532
    Section 492.1(8) of the Criminal Code.

                                                        72
of 60 days 533. When used to track an individual’s movement by identifying the location of a
thing that is usually carried or worn by the individual, it may only be used if there are
reasonable grounds to believe that an offence has been or will be committed and tracking the
individual will assist in the investigation 534.

Under the Criminal Code, criminal law enforcement authorities may also obtain a production
order 535 from a court, ordering a person to produce a copy of a document/prepare or produce a
document containing data that is in their possession or control 536. To issue a general
production order, the judge must be satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
an offence has been or will be committed, the document or data is in the person’s possession
or control and will produce evidence. For orders requiring the production of specific types of
information, i.e., transmission data, tracking data or financial data 537, the judge must be
satisfied that there are reasonable grounds to suspect that an offence has been or will be
committed; the relevant information is in the persons control and will assist in the
investigation of the offence 538.

As a general safeguard, warrants authorising the collection of tracking/transmission data and
production orders are considered public records to which individuals can obtain access, unless
a sealing order has been issued by a judge. A sealing order must be requested by a law
enforcement authority at the time of applying for the warrant/order and may be issued if the
disclosure would affect the course of justice (e.g., if it would compromise the identity of an
informant, compromise an ongoing investigation, etc.) or the information might be used for an




533
    Section 492.1(3) and (5) of the Criminal Code. In the context of investigations in relation to organised crime
and terrorism offences, a warrant may be valid for a maximum of one year, see para. 6 of the same Section.
534
    Section 492.1(2) of the Criminal Code.
535
    On the basis of the Criminal Code, the police or a judge may also compel an entity to preserve computer data
(although this may not be applied to an entity that is itself the subject of the investigation of the offence, see
Section 487.012(3) and 487.013(5) of the Criminal Code). In particular, the police may issue a preservation
demand if there are reasonable grounds to suspect that an offence has been or will be committed or, in the case
of an offence committed under a law of a foreign state, an investigation is being conducted by a person or
authority with responsibility in that state for the investigation of such offences; and the computer data is in the
person’s possession or control and will assist in the investigation of the offence (Section 487.012 of the Criminal
Code). Such a demand expires (unless revoked earlier) within 21 days in the case of an offence under Canadian
law or within 90 days in case of an offence under foreign law (Section 487.012(4) of the Criminal Code).
Preservation demands may not be renewed, and where continued preservation is needed, a preservation order
would need to be obtained from a court. A judge may issue a preservation order under the same conditions, if the
requesting police officer intends to apply or has applied for a warrant or an order in connection with the
investigation to obtain a document containing the computer data (Section 487.013(1) if the Criminal Code).
Preservation orders issued by a judge expire within 90 days (Section 487.013(6) of the Criminal Code). Entities
subject to a preservation order or demand must destroy the computer data that would not be retained in the
ordinary course of business as soon as feasible after the demand or order expires or is revoked (Section 487.0194
(1)-(2) of the Criminal Code), subject to criminal sanctions (Section 487.0199 of the Criminal Code).
536
    Section 487.014 of the Criminal Code. Entities receiving such orders may apply in writing to the judge that
issued the order to revoke or change it, in accordance with Section 487.0193(1) of the Criminal Code. In that
case, the entity is not required to prepare or produce the requested information until a final decision is made. The
judge may revoke or amend the order if satisfied that it would be unreasonable in the circumstance to require the
preparation or production of the information, or production of the information would disclose information that is
privileged or otherwise protected by law (Section 487.0193(4) of the Criminal Code).
537
    This includes the account number of the person named in the order, the type of account, the status of the
account and the date on which the account was opened or closed (Section 187.018(1) of the Criminal Code).
538
    See Section 487.015-487.018 of the Criminal Code.

                                                        73
improper purpose and this reason outweighs the importance of access to the information by
the individual 539.

In addition to disclosing information pursuant to binding measures adopted under the
Criminal Code, organisations subject to PIPEDA may in certain circumstances disclose
information to public authorities on a voluntary basis, either on their own initiative or to
comply with a request for the information. When receiving information in such cases,
criminal law enforcement authorities may only use or disclose it in accordance with the
requirements described in section 2.2.2. An organisation may collect and disclose personal
information to a government institution on its own initiative when it has reasonable grounds
to believe that the information relates to a violation of the law 540. Organisations may also
disclose personal information when receiving a request from a government institution 541 and
may collect and use personal information for the purpose of such disclosure 542. When making
a request, the institution must identify its lawful authority to obtain the information. The
existence of a reasonable expectation of privacy of the concerned individual is a central factor
to take into account in determining whether there is such lawful authority.

Case law clarifies how these provisions are to be applied in practice. For example, the Ontario
Court of Appeal found that the routine sharing of information with public authorities (in this
case the informal sharing of energy consumption data by electricity provider with the police)
does not comply with PIPEDA and needs to be distinguished from a situation where a service
provider discloses specific information to the police with concerns that a crime has been
committed 543. The Supreme Court of Canada found that obtaining IP addresses (which can,
when associated with an identity, reveal highly personal information) through a request where
the police had no authority to compel compliance with that request constituted an
unconstitutional search 544. According to the Court, obtaining such information engaged a
reasonable expectation of privacy and therefore constituted a search within the meaning of
Section 8 of the Charter, requiring either a warrant or specific empowerment by law. The
police could therefore not rely solely on PIPEDA’s provisions relating to voluntary
disclosures to obtain the information. Following this decision in 2014, all telecommunication
providers that have published transparency reports have reported zero voluntary disclosures of
subscriber information.

Finally, criminal law enforcement authorities may also indirectly receive personal information
from Canada’s Financial Intelligence Unit, the Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis
Centre of Canada (FINTRAC) 545, to which certain organisations subject to PIPEDA have to

539
    Section 467.3(1)-(2) of the Criminal Code. An application to terminate or vary a sealing order may be made
to the judge who made the order or a judge of the court before which any proceedings arising out of the
investigation in relation to which the warrant was obtained may be held (Section 467.3(4) of the Criminal Code).
540
    Section 7(3)(d)(i)-(ii) PIPEDA. The same applies if the information relates to national security, the defence of
Canada or the conduct of international affairs.
541
    Sections 7(3)(c.1)(i) - (ii) PIPEDA.
542
    Section 7(1)(e)(i) and 7(2)(d) PIPEDA).
543
    R. v. Orlandis-Habsburgo, 2017 ONCA 649.
544
    R v. Spencer, 2014 SCC 43.
545
    FINTRAC is independent from law enforcement authorities and collects, analyses and discloses information
to help detect, prevent and deter money laundering and terrorist financing activities in Canada and abroad. It was
established to implement the international recommendations for combating money laundering and terrorist
financing issued by the Financial Action Task Force. FINTRAC itself is subject to the Privacy Act and to
specific requirements under the PCLMTFA regarding the handling of the information it receives, including e.g.,

                                                        74
disclose financial transaction information 546. For example, under the Proceeds of Crime
(Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Act (PCLMTFA), such organisations have to
report on large electronic fund transfers 547, terrorist property 548, large cash transactions 549 and
financial transactions for which there are reasonable grounds to suspect that they are related to
the (attempted) commission of a money laundering or terrorist activity financing offence550.
FINTRAC must in turn disclose financial intelligence information to criminal law
enforcement authorities where it has reasonable grounds to suspect that the information would
be relevant to investigating or prosecuting a money laundering or terrorist financing
offence 551. The information that may be reported includes the name of the person or entity
involved in the transaction, the amount and type of currency involved, the transaction and
account number, etc. 552 Information received from FINTRAC cannot be used as evidence, but
is meant to support law enforcement authorities when applying for judicial authorisation of
investigative measures (production orders, warrants). Any information received from
FINTRAC can only be processed by a criminal law enforcement authority in accordance with
the requirements described below in section 2.2.2.

         2.2.2. Further use of the information collected

The processing of personal information collected by Canadian criminal law enforcement
authorities is subject to the federal Privacy Act and privacy legislation at provincial/territorial
level. The Privacy Act sets requirements on purpose limitation, accuracy, transparency and
storage limitation 553 and specify the circumstances in which federal criminal law enforcement
authorities may use or disclose personal information. Further processing (use and disclosure)
without consent is only allowed under a limited number of grounds that are enumerated in the
Act, e.g., when permitted by a federal statute, where necessary to comply with a warrant or
subpoena, for internal audit purposes, or where the public interest in the processing clearly
outweighs the invasion of privacy or where it clearly benefits the concerned individual 554. The
Act also requires public authorities to keep records of the personal information under their



on data retention, the destruction of information that is not required by law and the sharing of information with
other (foreign) authorities (see e.g., Section 54(1)(d), Section 54(2) and Section 56.1 PCLMTFA.
546
    Entities that are required to report include accountants, casinos, financial entities, life insurance companies,
brokers and agents, securities dealers, etc.
547
    I.e., of at least CAN$10 000 out of or into Canada in a single transaction or two or more transactions made
within 24 hours by or on behalf of the same individual or entity Section 12(1)(b) and (c) of the Proceeds of
Crime (Money Laundering) and Terrorist Financing Regulations (PCMLTFR). This applies to financial entities,
money services businesses and casinos.)
548
    I.e., property that is believed or known to be owned or controlled by or on behalf of a terrorist or terrorist
group) Section 7.1 of the PCLMTFR and Section 8 of the Regulations Implementing the United Nations
Resolutions on the Suppression of Terrorism.
549
    I.e., of at least CAN$10 000 received in the course of a single transaction, or two or more cash amounts made
within 24 hours by or on behalf of the same individual or entity, Section 12(1)(a) of the PCLMTFR.
550
     Section 7 PCLMTFA. This reporting obligation applies for example to financial entities; life insurance
companies, brokers or agents; securities dealers, portfolio managers and investment counsellors that are
provincially authorized; money services businesses; and accounting firms.
551
    Section 55(3) PCLMTFA. In addition, FINTRAC must under certain circumstances disclose information to
other public authorities, such as the Canada Revenue Agency, the Canada Border Services Agency, the
Communications Security Establishment and the Competition Bureau (see Section 55(3) (b) to (g) PCLMFTA.
552
    Section 55(7) PCLMFTA.
553
    See e.g., Sections 5(2), 6, 7, 8, and 12 of the Privacy Act as regards federal authorities.
554
    Section 7-8 of the Privacy Act.

                                                        75
control, including of the purposes for which personal information is used and the applicable
retention period 555. Similar obligations apply under provincial and territorial privacy laws.

In addition, different instruments have been adopted by the Canadian government that further
specify how public authorities should protect personal information. With respect to the
sharing of data with other entities (within or outside Canada), guidance of the Treasury Board
of Canada Secretariat (which is responsible for developing policy instruments, including
guidance, concerning the application and implementation of the federal Privacy Act)
recommends to put in place information sharing agreements (legally binding agreements or
arrangements/memoranda of understanding) containing appropriate personal information
protection safeguards 556. The latter for instance include purpose specification and limitation,
security measures, maximum retention periods, rights of access and to request correction for
individuals, conflict resolution mechanisms, etc. 557. More generally, including under the
Avoiding Complicity in Mistreatment by Foreign Entities Act, ministerial direction prohibits
the disclosure of information by criminal law enforcement authorities with foreign entities
where this would result in a substantial risk of mistreatment of an individual by those
entities 558.

The Security of Canada Information Disclosure Act (SCIDA) permits Government
institutions to share information related to threats to the security of Canada with other
Canadian federal government institutions, such as federal law enforcement and security and
intelligence agencies, but places strict parameters around doing so, including by requiring that
the information relates to the receiving institutions mandate or responsibilities, and that
disclosing would not impact personal privacy rights more than reasonably necessary in the
circumstances. Disclosures under the SCIDA are also reviewed annually by the National
Security and Intelligence Review Agency (NSIRA), on which a public report is tabled in
Parliament.

Finally, with respect to the content of intercepted communications or the existence of such
communications, the Criminal Code imposes specific limitations, subject to criminal
sanctions (e.g., by prohibiting the use or disclosure without the consent of the concerned
individual, except where required in the course of a criminal investigation) 559.

        2.2.3. Oversight

The activities of Canadian criminal law enforcement authorities are supervised by different
bodies.

First, the OPC carries out oversight of compliance with the Privacy Act by federal authorities.
The OPC receives and investigates complaints from individuals, may initiate investigations on


555
    Section 10-11 of the Privacy Act.
556
     Section 4.2.11 of the Policy on Privacy Protection, available at: https://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/pol/doc-
eng.aspx?id=12510. See also section 6.2.22 of the Directive on Privacy Practices, available at: https://www.tbs-
sct.canada.ca/pol/doc-eng.aspx?id=18309.
557
      https://www.canada.ca/en/treasury-board-secretariat/services/access-information-privacy/privacy/guidance-
preparing-information-sharing-agreements-involving-personal-information.html#Toc267044420
558
    See https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/trnsprnc/ns-trnsprnc/mnstrl-drctn-rcmp-grc-en.aspx.
559
    Section 193 of the Criminal Code.

                                                      76
its own initiative560 and may more generally review processing activities of government
institutions to ensure compliance with the Privacy Act. In carrying out investigations, the
OPC has access to all relevant information, 561. In particular, it may summon and enforce the
appearance of persons, compel them to give oral or written evidence on oath and produce
such documents and things as the OPC deems relevant to the investigation. Similarly, the
OPC may enter any premises occupied by any government institution. If the OPC finds a
violation of the Privacy Act, it provides the relevant agency with a report setting out the
findings and recommendations 562. Where appropriate, the OPC may also request that, within a
specified time, notice must be given of any action taken or proposed to implement the
recommendations (or reasons why no such action has been or is proposed to be taken). The
OPC is required to report annually to the Parliament and may also make its reports on specific
investigations available to the Parliament 563. For example, in June 2021, the OPC submitted a
special report to the Parliament on its investigation on the use of facial recognition technology
by the RCMP 564. The annual reports of the OPC also show that it regularly engages with law
enforcement authorities, including at an early stage when new technologies are being tested or
rolled out (e.g., body-worn cameras, drones), e.g., in the context of privacy impact
assessments and advisory consultations 565.

Second, at provincial and territorial levels, oversight of compliance by criminal law
enforcement authorities with personal information protection rules is carried out by
independent Information and Privacy Commissioners, ombudspersons or review officers.
Specific oversight powers may vary in each province or territory. For example, some
supervisory authorities can issue binding or enforceable orders (in Alberta, British Columbia,
Ontario, Quebec and Prince Edward Island), while others issue recommendations (Northwest
Territories, Nova Scotia, Nunavut, Saskatchewan, Yukon) that can in some cases be enforced
by a court (New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador) or an independent adjudicator
(Manitoba).

Third, different specialised bodies oversee the activities of the police more generally, at
federal, provincial and territorial levels. In particular, the RCMP is subject to oversight by the
Civilian Review and Complaints Commission for the Royal Canadian Mounted Police
(CRCC) 566. The CRCC can review any activity of the RCMP for the purpose of ensuring
compliance with applicable legislation, regulations, ministerial directions, policies,
procedures or guidelines, either on the basis of a complaint or on its own initiative and issue a
report to the responsible Minister and the head of the RCMP with its findings and


560
    Section 29(1) and (3) of the Privacy Act.
561
    Section 34(1)-(2) of the Privacy Act. The only exceptions to this power relate to confidences of the King’s
Privy Council for Canada (section 34(2) of the Privacy Act) and, under certain circumstances, solicitor-client and
litigation privileged materials (section 34(2.1) of the Act).
562
    Section 35(1) and 37(3) of the Privacy Act.
563
    Section 38-40 of the Privacy Act.
564
    https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-decisions/ar_index/202021/sr_rcmp/.
565
      See e.g., https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-decisions/ar_index/202021/ar_202021/#toc4 and
https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-decisions/ar_index/201920/ar_201920/.
566
    Part VI of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act (RCMP Act). The members of the CRCC are appointed
by order of the Governor in Council for (a renewable term of) five years and may only be removed by the order
of the Governor in Council for cause (Section 25 RCMP Act. A member of the RCMP may not become a
member of the CRCC.

                                                       77
recommendations 567. In carrying out reviews and investigations, the CRCC has access to all
relevant information 568. In 2020-2021, the CRCC issued 322 review reports, with 239
recommendations (e.g., with operational guidance or recommending retraining or policy
reviews) 569, of which 88% were accepted by the RCMP.

Similar bodies provide oversight of law enforcement agencies at provincial and territorial
level, e.g., the Independent Investigations Office of British Columbia, the Law Enforcement
Review Board in Alberta, the Office of the Independent Police Review Director in Ontario,
the Public Complaints Commission in Saskatchewan, the Police Ethics Commissioner in
Quebec, the Police Complaints Commissioner in Nova Scotia, etc. 570

         2.2.4. Redress

The Canadian system offers different avenues to obtain redress, including compensation for
damages.

First, individuals have rights of access to and correction of their personal information held by
public authorities.

At federal level, the Privacy Act provides individuals with a right of access to their personal
information and a right of correction. Whereas these rights were in the past only available to
Canadian citizens, permanent residents or individuals present in Canada 571, they have now
been extended to all individuals, regardless of their nationality or place of residence 572. As a
consequence, any individual can exercise the rights of access and to request correction under
the Privacy Act and has the possibility to file a complaint with the OPC if a request is
refused 573. With respect to the right of access, the relevant public authority may only refuse to
disclose the requested records in limited and specific circumstances, by invoking exemptions
that are either class-based or injury-based 574. Class-based exemptions presuppose that the
information is inherently sensitive, and that injury or prejudice would result from release.

567
    Section 45.34(1) of the RCMP Act.
568
    Section 45.39 and 45.4(2) of the RCMP Act. See also Section 45.65 et seq. with respect to investigations of
complaints. While the RCMP may refuse to provide access to certain types of information (information protected
by the privilege between a legal counsel and their client, information relating to a protected person (under the
Witness Protection Act), medical information of RCMP members, as well as ‘operational information’, the
CRCC may in that case request to appoint a former judge to review the requested information in light of the
arguments invoked by the RCMP and the relevance thereof for the Commission. The observations of the former
judge must be taken into account by the RCMP and Commission in the final decision whether or not the
information can be shared. See the procedure of Section 45.41 of the RCMP Act.
569
    https://www.crcc-ccetp.gc.ca/en/annual-report-2020-2021#toc3.
570
    See the list available at: https://www.crcc-ccetp.gc.ca/en/jurisdiction.
571
    Section 12 of the Privacy Act, Privacy Act Extension Order, No. 1 and Privacy Act Extension Order, No. 2.
572
    To further strengthen the rights of individuals and to align with provincial and international practice, the
Privacy Act Extension Order, No. 3 was made on 13 July 2021 and entered into force on 13 July 2022. The order
extends the right of access under subsection 12(1) of the Privacy Act to any individual outside of Canada. Such
individuals also benefit from the right to request correction under subsection 12(2) of the Privacy Act, since this
right flows from the right of access. Before this extension order came into effect, non-Canadian nationals and
non-permanent residents not present in Canada could nevertheless obtain access to their personal information
held by federal authorities on the basis of the Access to Information Act through a third party present in Canada
(Access to Information Act Extension Order, No. 1). In that case, the individual must provide his/her consent to
the disclosure of records containing personal information concerning him/her to the third party (Section 19(2) of
the ATIA).
573
    Section 29(1)(b) and (c) of the Privacy Act.
574
    See Sections 18 – 28 of the Privacy Act.

                                                        78
Injury-based exemptions are imposed when there is a “reasonable expectation of probable
harm that would result from the disclosure of information” 575. With a few exceptions 576, both
types of exemptions are not absolute, but leave discretion to the relevant authority, which
means that it has to decide on a case-by-case basis whether or not to apply the exemption,
after weighing relevant factors involved, including the privacy interests of the concerned
individual 577. Individuals who have been refused access to or correction of personal
information, if a complaint has been made to the Privacy Commissioner in respect of the
refusal, also have the possibility to apply directly to the Federal Court for a review of the
matter, under the Privacy Act 578. In that case, the Court may order the concerned institution to
grant access or correct the information.

In addition, the privacy legislation for the public sector in each province and territory grants
any individual (i.e., without limitations related to nationality or residence) the right of access
to his/her personal information and to have inaccurate information corrected. Moreover,
individuals can request a review of a decision on an access/correction request before the
competent supervisory authority. Depending on the province/territory, the rights of
access/correction of individuals may be enforced directly by the supervisory authority (by
issuing binding orders, e.g., in Alberta, British Columbia, Ontario, Prince Edward Island), an
adjudicator (e.g., in Manitoba), or the courts (e.g., in New Brunswick, Newfoundland and
Labrador, Nova Scotia, Nunavut, Québec, Saskatchewan and Yukon).

Second, individuals may file complaints with independent oversight bodies.

At the federal level, any individual may file a complaint with the Privacy Commissioner in
respect of any matter relating to the handling of personal information by a criminal law
enforcement authority or other federal government institution579. The Privacy Act does not
require the individual to have been personally affected, or to demonstrate injury for a

575
    See also Section 3.2 of the Access to Information Manual of the Canada Treasury Board, available at:
https://www.canada.ca/en/treasury-board-secretariat/services/access-information-privacy/access-
information/access-information-manual.html.
576
    Only some of the class-based exemptions are mandatory (and have to be applied in all circumstances (i.e.,
without any balancing of interests), see also the Directive on Personal Information Requests and Correction of
Personal Information, issued by the Canadian Government (available at https://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/pol/doc-
eng.aspx?id=32590&section=html). These concern information that was obtained in confidence from another
(third country) public authority, unless the latter consents to the disclosure or makes the information public
(Section 19 of the Privacy Act); information held by the OPC in the context of ongoing investigations (Section
22.1 of the Privacy Act); information handled by the Public Sector Integrity Commissioner or under the Public
Servants Disclosure Protection Act (Sections 22.2 and 22.3 of the Privacy Act) or information about another
individual (Section 26 of the Privacy Act).
577
    These exemptions e.g., apply to information obtained by investigative bodies in the course of lawful
investigations pertaining to the detection, prevention or suppression of crime, the enforcement of any law of
Canada or a province, or activities suspected of constituting threats to the security of Canada (if the relevant
record came into existence less than 20 years prior to the request); information that, if disclosed, could
reasonably be expected to be injurious to the conduct of international affairs, the defence of Canada, or the
detection, prevention or suppression of subversive or hostile activities; if the disclosure could reasonably be
expected to be injurious to the enforcement of any law of Canada or a province or the conduct of lawful
investigations (paragraph 22(1)(b) of the Privacy Act). With respect to the latter exemption, the Supreme Court
of Canada found that “there must be a clear and direct connection between the disclosure of specific information
and the injury that is alleged.” In particular, “the sole objective of non-disclosure must not be to facilitate the
work of the body in question.” See Lavigne v. Canada (Office of the Commissioner of Official Languages), 2002
SCC 53, [2002] 2 S.C.R. 773.
578
    Section 41 of the Privacy Act.
579
    Section 29 of the Privacy Act.

                                                        79
complaint to be admissible. If a complaint is well-founded, the Commissioner issues a report
containing findings and non-binding recommendations, as well as, where appropriate, a
request to inform the Commissioner of any action taken to Implement a recommendation
within a specified time 580. Where the described action taken or proposed to be taken to
implement the recommendations would be inadequate, the OPC must inform the complainant
thereof 581. Individuals may challenge the investigations and reports of the OPC before the
Federal Court, pursuant to Section 18.1 of the Federal Courts Act on procedural grounds 582.
For instance, the Federal Court may grant relief if it is satisfied that the Commissioner acted
without/beyond jurisdiction; failed to observe a principle of natural justice, procedural
fairness or other procedure that it was required by law to observe; erred in law; or based its
report on an erroneous finding of fact that it made in a perverse or capricious manner or
without regard for the material before it 583. For example, in Oleinik v Canada (Privacy
Commissioner), the Federal Court noted that “the [Privacy Commissioner’s] investigation
itself is amenable to review. If the report had material omissions, reached unreasonable
conclusions, contained unsustainable inferences, misconstrued the factual and legal context or
evinced a bias or pre-disposition on the part of the investigator, the Court could intervene.”584
The Court may, inter alia, order the OPC to do any act or thing that was unlawfully refused,
delayed or failed to be carried out, or declare invalid or unlawful, quash or set aside and refer
back a decision, order, act or proceeding 585.

With respect to compliance by provincial/territorial authorities with local privacy legislation,
individuals may file complaints before the independent personal information protection
authorities in each province/territory, which can issue binding orders (in Alberta, Quebec,
British Columbia, Ontario and Prince Edward Island), orders enforceable by the courts or an
adjudicator (in Manitoba, New Brunswick and Newfoundland and Labrador) or
recommendations (in Yukon, Saskatchewan, Nunavut and the Northwest Territories). In Nova
Scotia, an individual can appeal directly to the Supreme Court if it considers that a public
authority has not complied with the recommendations of the personal information protection
authority.

Third, individuals may in certain circumstances also file complaints with independent
oversight bodies in the area of criminal law enforcement. For example, the CRCC handles
complaints from any individual against the RCMP 586. Individuals may complain directly to
the CRCC, or first file a complaint with the RCMP and, if they are not satisfied with the
outcome, request a review before the CRCC 587. Once the investigation of a complaint is
concluded, the CRCC prepares a report setting out its findings and recommendations, which is

580
    Section 35(1) of the Privacy Act.
581
    Section 35(3) of the Privacy Act.
582
    Section 18.1(4) of the Federal Courts Act.
583
    Section 18.1(4) of the Federal Courts Act.
584
    Oleinik v Canada (Privacy Commissioner) (2011 FC 1266), para. 11.
585
    Subsection 18.1(3) of the Federal Courts Act.
586
    Section 45.53(1) and 45.59(1) of the RCMP Act.
587
    Section 45.7(1) of the RCMP Act. Complaints must in principle be filed within one year after the day on
which the alleged conduct occurred, although the time limit may be extended if there are good reasons for doing
so and it is not contrary to the public interest (Section 45.53(5)-(6) of the RCMP Act). In deciding whether this is
the case, a number of factors are taking into account, including reasonable explanations for the delay and
whether the submission presents an arguable case, see https://www.crcc-ccetp.gc.ca/en/policy-extension-time-
limit-submit-complaint-crcc.

                                                        80
shared with the responsible Minister, the RCMP and the complainant 588. Reports of the CRCC
are final and cannot be appealed or reviewed 589. In the period 2020-2021, 3361 complaints
were filed by individuals (3144 before the Commission and 201 before the RCMP), of which
2273 were admissible 590. In the same time frame, 2254 complaints were finalised. Similarly,
in 2019-2020, 3641 complaints were received, of which 2317 were admissible, and 2067
complaints were finalised. In certain provinces/territories, individuals may similarly obtain
redress against law enforcement authorities before independent oversight bodies (e.g., before
the Office of the Police Complaint Commissioner in British Columbia, The Saskatchewan
Public Complaints Commission, the Commissaire à la déontologie policière in Quebec, the
New Brunswick Police Commission, etc.) 591.

Fourth, different judicial remedies are available, allowing individuals to invoke the limitations
and safeguards described in section 2.2.1 to obtain redress.

In particular, anyone directly affected by the improper handling of personal information by
government institutions may apply for judicial review before the Federal Court, which does
not require a showing of harm or injury 592.

In addition, civil proceedings for damages 593 can be brought against the federal government
for torts committed by government agents, servants or members of the federal police force.
While the specific details of tort law vary across provinces, generally speaking the torts of
negligence, breach of confidence or intrusion on seclusion could be invoked against the
federal government where it misuses personal information. For a negligence claim to succeed,
the individual must establish that a duty of care existed (which requires foreseeability of harm
and proximity between the parties), that there was a breach of the applicable standard of care
(which requires demonstrating that the defendant’s conduct fell below what would have been
reasonable in the circumstances) and that this breach caused compensable harm. A successful
breach of confidence claim requires establishing that the information that is the subject of the
lawsuit was confidential, communicated in confidence and used in an unauthorised manner to
the detriment of the plaintiff. With respect to the tort of intrusion on seclusion, a person who
intentionally or recklessly intrudes, physically or otherwise, upon the seclusion of another
person’s private affairs or concerns may be liable if the invasion would be highly offensive to
a reasonable person and causes distress, humiliation or anguish. These same principles
generally also apply to civil claims against provincial or municipal authorities. Several court
cases demonstrate how these principles may apply to privacy violations by public authorities.
For example, in Condon v. Canada, a proposed class action based in negligence and breach of
confidence for losing a hard drive containing personal information was allowed to proceed 594.
Similarly, in TDC Broadband Inc. v. Nova Scotia, compensation was successfully claimed



588
    Section 45.76(3) of the RCMP Act.
589
    Section 45.76(4) of the RCMP Act.
590
    https://www.crcc-ccetp.gc.ca/en/report-rcmp-public-complaints-2020-2021.
591
    An overview of the available redress avenues is available at: https://www.crcc-ccetp.gc.ca/en/jurisdiction.
Figures on complaint handling by these bodies in 2020-2021 is available at: https://www.crcc-
ccetp.gc.ca/en/report-rcmp-public-complaints-2020-2021.
592
    Section 18.1 of the Federal Courts Act.
593
    Section 3 of the Crown Liability and Proceedings Act.
594
    Condon v. Canada, 2015 FCA 159.

                                                      81
against a provincial government for a breach of confidence (involving the unauthorised use of
confidential information) 595.

Finally, judicial remedies are available to any individual whose rights under the Charter have
been violated, as a result of government action or legislation.

In particular, under Section 24 of the Charter, anyone whose rights under the Charter have
been violated may apply to a court to obtain such remedy as the court considers appropriate
and just in the circumstances. This may include compensation for damages, declaratory relief
and injunctive relief 596. Moreover, where the court concludes that evidence was obtained in a
manner that infringed any rights or freedoms guaranteed by the Charter and the court finds
that the admission of evidence would bring the administration of justice into disrepute, the
evidence must be excluded 597. For a claim under Section 24 of the Charter to be successful, an
individual must a) establish an adequate factual foundation, b) bring his or her claim at the
correct stage of litigation and c) persuade the court that, on a balance of probabilities, his or
her Charter rights have been violated 598.

In addition, individuals can bring an action for a declaration that certain laws conflict with the
Charter and are, therefore, of no force of effect under Section 52 of the Constitution Act 1867.
For example, in one case the Supreme Court found that provisions of the Criminal Code were
unreasonable because they did not require notification of individuals whose communications
had been intercepted without a warrant 599. Claimants may invoke Section 52 of the
Constitution by alleging infringements of their own rights and freedoms; based on being
affected by an allegedly unconstitutional law or administrative decision 600; or based on
“public interest standing”, i.e., if there is a serious issue as to the validity of the legislation,
the individual has a genuine interest in the measure’s validity, and the litigation is a
reasonable and effective way to bring the matter before the court 601.

      2.3. Access and use by Canadian public authorities for national security purposes

In Canada, two agencies collect personal information for national security purposes.

The core mandate of the Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS) is to collect foreign
intelligence in Canada, investigate activities suspected of constituting threats to the security of
Canada and advise the Government about these threats, which entails that CSIS is collecting,
analysing and retaining information, including personal information. CSIS also has the
mandate to take lawful measures to reduce threats to the security of Canada.




595
    TDC Broadband Inc. v. Nova Scotia, 2016 NSSC 206.
596
    See the overview provided at https://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/csj-sjc/rfc-dlc/ccrf-ccdl/check/art241.html.
597
    Section 24(2) of the Charter.
598
    R. v. Collins, [1987] 1 S.C.R. 265, at page 277.
599
    R. v. Tse, 2012 SCC 16.
600
    R. v. Big M Drug Mart, [1985] 1 SCR 295 at pages 313-14; Loyola High School v. Quebec (Attorney
General), 2015 SCC 12 at paras 33-35.
601
    Canada (Attorney General) v. Downtown Eastside Sex Workers United Against Violence Society, [2012] 2
S.C.R. 524.

                                                    82
The Communications Security Establishment (CSE) is the national signals intelligence agency
for foreign intelligence and the expert body for cybersecurity and information assistance602.
Since the activities of the CSE may not be directed at Canadian individuals or corporations, or
any person in Canada, it may in principle only access personal information transferred on the
basis of the adequacy decision while it is in transit between the EU and Canada. The relevant
powers of both agencies, as regulated by the CSIS Act and CSE Act, are described in the
following sections 603.

         2.3.1. Legal bases and applicable limitation/safeguards

             2.3.1.1.      The Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS)

On the basis of the CSIS Act, CSIS may access personal information transferred from the EU
to private operators subject to PIPEDA as part of different activities, each of which is subject
to specific limitations and safeguards following from the CSIS Act, the Canadian Constitution
(Section 8 of the Charter) and case law 604.

First, CSIS can, “to the extent strictly necessary,” collect information and intelligence on
activities that may on reasonable grounds be suspected of constituting threats to the security
of Canada (threat investigations) 605. Second, CSIS may, in relation to the defence of Canada
or the conduct of international affairs, assist the Ministers of National Defence or Foreign

602
    The cybersecurity and information assistance aspect of CSE’s mandate is to provide advice, guidance and
services to help protect electronic information and information infrastructures of (federal) institutions. In
addition, it provides technical and operational assistance to federal law enforcement and security agencies (such
as CSIS), the Canadian Forces and the Department of National Defence.
603
    In addition to using the powers described in this section, CSIS and CSE may also receive information from
private operators that is provided on a voluntary basis in accordance with PIPEDA (see section 2.2.1). CSIS may
furthermore indirectly receive information on financial transactions from FINTRAC, if the latter has reasonable
grounds to suspect that information it has received would be relevant to threats to the security of Canada, Section
55.1(1) PCMLTFA. The information that must be disclosed concerns, inter alia, the name of the person/entity
involved in the transaction, the amount and type of currency or monetary instruments involved, the transaction
number and account number, indicators of a money laundering or terrorist activity financing offence, etc.
(Section 55.1(3) PCMLTFA) The reasons for each decision to disclose must be recorded in writing (Section
55.1(2) PCMLTFA). Finally, CSIS and CSE may receive information from other public authorities, if the latter
are satisfied that this will contribute to the exercise of the recipient’s jurisdiction in respect of activities that
undermine the security of Canada, and it will not affect any person’s privacy interest more than is reasonably
necessary in the circumstances (Section 5 of the Security of Canada Information Disclosure Act, SCIDA). An
activity that undermines the security of Canada means any activity that undermines the sovereignty, security or
territorial integrity of Canada or threatens the lives or the security of people in Canada, or of any individual
(Section 2(1) SCIDA). In addition, compliance must be ensured with the requirements described in section 2.2.2.
604
    CSIS may also assist the Government with security assessments (i.e. assessments of individuals seeking
security clearances when this is required by the federal public service as a condition of employment) and provide
information or advice relating to security matters that is relevant to the exercise of any powers or functions under
the Citizenship Act or the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (i.e. by conducting security assessments
during the visa application process and the application process for refugees and Canadian citizenship), Section
13-14 CSIS Act. However, for the purpose of these tasks, the CSIS cannot make use of the warrant procedure
described below to use intrusive techniques (See also X(Re) 2016 FC 1105 at para. 168).
605
    Section 12(1) CSIS Act. Section 2 of the CSIS Act defines threats to the security of Canada as a) espionage or
sabotage that is directed against Canada or is detrimental to its interests (as well as activities directed toward or
in support of such espionage or sabotage); b) foreign influenced activities within or relating to Canada that are
detrimental to the interests of Canada and are clandestine or deceptive or involve a threat to any person; c)
activities within or relating to Canada directed toward or in support of the threat or use of acts of serious
violence against persons or property for the purpose of achieving a political, religious or ideological objective
within Canada or a foreign state; and d) activities directed toward undermining by covered unlawful acts, or
directed toward or intended ultimately to lead to the destruction or overthrow by violence of, the constitutionally
established system of government in Canada.

                                                         83
Affairs in the collection of information or intelligence within Canada in relation to the
capabilities, intentions or activities of any foreign state or group of foreign states and any
person other than Canadian citizens, permanent residents, or Canadian corporations (foreign
intelligence collection) 606. Third, if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a particular
activity constitutes a threat to the security of Canada, CSIS may, within or outside Canada,
take measures to reduce the threat (threat reduction measures), which may in certain
circumstances require ancillary access to (personal) information.

For the first and second powers, CSIS must obtain judicial authorisation in the form a warrant
issued by the Federal Court prior to using any techniques that would intrude more than
minimally on a privacy interest protected by Section 8 of the Charter and/or otherwise violate
Canadian law in the execution of the judicial authorisation 607. This is for example the case for
the interception of an individual’s communications 608, obtaining detailed billing or subscriber
information from communication service providers, or using cell-site simulator technology to
track an individual’s device. In other words, nothing in the CSIS Act authorises CSIS to
violate Section 8 of the Charter. The judicial warrant obtained in this context ensures that
lawful authority underlies those CSIS activities that intrude more than minimally on protected
privacy interest, thus making make the activities in question compliant with Section 8 of the
Charter. Likewise, the warrant may authorise activities that, absent the warrant, would
otherwise contravene Canadian law.

A warrant to investigate threats to the security of Canada may be issued if (1) it is required to
enable the CSIS to investigate a specific threat (i.e., “the information sought is factually
related to a threat to the security of Canada”) 609 and (2) other investigative procedures have
been tried and have failed or are unlikely to succeed, the urgency of the matter is such that it
would be impractical to carry out the investigation using only other investigative procedures,
or it is unlikely that the information could be obtained without a warrant 610. The CSIS Act
lists the information that must be provided in the application for a warrant and the warrant
itself, which includes the type of communication to be intercepted or the type of information,
records, documents or things to be obtained; the identity of the target, if known; and a general
description of the place where the warrant is to be executed 611. In principle, a warrant may be
issued for a period up to one year 612 and may be renewed by a judge, on written application
by CSIS, for a period not exceeding the period for which the warrant was issued 613.


606
    Section 16(1) CSIS Act.
607
    Section 21 CSIS Act.
608
    See e.g., X(Re) 2014 FCA 249 at 87.
609
    X(Re) 2016 FC 1105, at 161. See also the clarification at 186 that “legitimate targets are individuals or groups
of interest that are, or potentially are, related to activities constituting threats to the security of Canada […]
Therefore, [incidentally collected] non-target and non-threat related third party information may only be retained
for a short period of time in order to ensure that it is not related to national security. If, after such short time
period, the information is determined not to be related to threats to the security of Canada as defined by section 2
of the CSIS Act, or of assistance to a prosecution, to national defence or international affairs, it must be
destroyed”.
610
    Section 21(3) CSIS Act.
611
    Section 21(2) and (4) CSIS Act
612
    Section 21(5) CSIS Act. Where it is issued to enable the CSIS to investigate activities aimed at undermining
(by unlawful acts), destroying or overthrowing (by violence) the constitutionally established system of
government, a warrant may only be issued for a period not exceeding 60 days.
613
    Section 22 CSIS Act.

                                                        84
The role of the judge in assessing the application for a warrant is to “ensure all requirements
of the legislation are respected in the application for warrants and that the measures sought are
justified in light of the facts put forward” 614. In light of the requirements of the CSIS Act, the
judge therefore assesses, inter alia, whether the information sought is “strictly necessary” to
investigate a threat and whether other less intrusive techniques or procedures are not available
or would not be effective 615. Moreover, in assessing compliance with Section 8 of the Charter,
the judge may look at additional elements, e.g., whether the proposed measure is no more
intrusive than is reasonably necessary to achieve its objectives (i.e., whether the measure
strikes an appropriate balance between the rights of the individual and the objectives being
pursued by the state) 616. The judge issuing a warrant may specify terms and conditions
considered advisable in the public interest 617.

The same standard and procedure applies to deploy more intrusive investigative techniques
(such as intercepting communications) as part of the CSIS’ foreign intelligence collection
mandate 618.

For the third power (threat reduction measures), CSIS must also obtain judicial authorisation
in the form a warrant issued by the Federal Court prior to undertaking any threat reduction
measure that would either limit a right or freedom guaranteed by the Charter or otherwise be
contrary to Canadian law 619. A warrant to take threat reduction measures may be issued if the
measure required to reduce the threat and the measure is “reasonable and proportionate” in the
circumstances of the case 620, having regard to the nature of the threat, the nature of the
measures and the reasonable availability of other means to reduce the threat, as well as the
reasonably foreseeable effects on third parties, including their right to privacy 621. Moreover,
the measure must comply with the Charter, e.g., the limit effected by the measure on a Charter
right or freedom should not be more intrusive than is reasonably necessary to achieve its




614
    X(Re) 2016 FC 1105, at 162.
615
    Section 12(1) and 21(3) CSIS Act. Given that the decision to issue a warrant is of a discretionary nature, a
judge may also take other factors into account, depending on the particular circumstances of the case (X(Re)
2014 FCA 249 at 60-61).
616
    R. v Vu, [2013] 3 S.C.R. 657.
617
    Section 21(4)(f) CSIS Act.
618
    In particular, the application for a warrant must contain the same detailed information and the judge may
authorise the warrant if satisfied that a) it is required for CSIS to perform its duties and functions under section
16 (i.e. there is a link between the information sought and being able to provide the requested assistance in
relation to the defence of Canada or the conduct of international affairs)and b) other (less intrusive) investigative
procedures are not available or would not be effective (Section 21(2) CSIS Act). In carrying out this assessment,
the judge would again take into account the requirements of the CSIS Act and the Charter, including by looking
at the overall proportionality of the requested measure. In addition, any foreign intelligence collection may only
take place on the written request of the Minister of National Defence or the Minister of Foreign Affairs and with
the written consent of the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness (Section 16(3) CSIS Act). In
addition, CSIS’ collection of foreign intelligence under section 16 can only take place within Canada (Section
16(1)).
619
    Sections 12.1(3.2), 12.1(3.4) and 21.1 CSIS Act.
620
    Section 21.1(3) CSIS Act. The application for a warrant must set out the facts relied on to justify the belief on
reasonable grounds that a warrant is required to take measures to reduce a threat, as well as the reasonableness
and proportionality of the proposed measures (Section 21.1(2)(a) and (c) CSIS Act). In addition, it must contain
the same detailed information as required in a section 21 warrant for a section 12 or 16 investigation (see
earlier).
621
    Sections 21.1(2)(c) and 22.2 CSIS Act. See also Section 12.1(2) CSIS Act.

                                                         85
threat reduction objectives 622. Terms and conditions deemed advisable in the public interest
may be specified in the warrant 623. The warrant may in principle be issued for a maximum of
120 days 624 and may, upon written application, be renewed twice if the conditions continue to
be fulfilled 625.

Finally, CSIS may, to support its abovementioned duties and functions, collect datasets 626 that
contain personal information and that do not directly and immediately relate to activities that
represent a threat to the security of Canada, where it is satisfied that the dataset is relevant to
the performance of those duties and functions and the dataset is reasonably believed: to be
publicly available (i.e., available to the public at the time of collection), to belong to an
approved class of Canadian datasets (i.e., relating predominantly to Canadians or
individuals/corporations within Canada), or to predominantly relate to non-Canadians who are
outside Canada (i.e., foreign dataset) 627.

Specific substantive and procedural requirements to collect, retain, exploit and query these
three types of datasets are set out in the CSIS Act and differ for each type of dataset. When it
comes to the retention of a collected dataset, this report focuses on the procedural
requirements applicable to foreign datasets, as this is the type of collection that is the most
relevant in an adequacy context (i.e., where personal information is transferred from the EU to
Canadian commercial operators and may subsequently be accessed by Canadian public
authorities). In particular, once a dataset is collected, CSIS has to assess and confirm within
90 days what type of dataset (i.e., whether it is a Canadian, foreign or publicly available
dataset) it concerns 628. During this period, the dataset may in principle (see below) not be
queried or exploited 629. In the course of conducting the evaluation during the 90-day period, a
limited number of CSIS staff (“designated employees”) 630 may delete any extraneous,
erroneous, or poor-quality information contained in the dataset. During this time, designated
employees may also decrypt or translate the information in the collected dataset or apply
specific privacy protection techniques 631. During the 90-day evaluation period, a designated
employee must delete any personal information from the dataset that is not relevant to the


622
    Section 12.1(3.3) CSIS Act. This derives from Section 1 of the Charter, as further interpreted in case law (see
section 2.1), which guarantees rights and freedoms “subject only to such reasonable limits prescribed by law as
can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society.”
623
    Section 21.1(5)(f) CSIS Act.
624
    Except with respect to threats concerning activities toward undermining the constitutionally established
system of government in Canada (for which a warrant may be issued for a maximum of 60 days, Section 21.1(6)
CSIS Act).
625
    Section 22.1 CSIS Act.
626
    A dataset is defined at section 2 CSIS Act as a collection of information stored as an electronic record and
characterised by a common subject matter.
627
    Sections 2, 11.02, 11.05 and 11.07(1) CSIS Act.
628
    Section 11.07(1) CSIS Act. Data incidentally collected in the execution of a warrant to investigate threats to
the security of Canada may also be retained to constitute a dataset, if the judge authorising the warrant is
satisfied that it is likely to assist the CSIS in the performance of its duties with respect to investigation of
security threats, the adoption of threat reduction measures, or the foreign intelligence mandate (Section 21(1.1)
and (3.01) CSIS Act.).
629
    Section 11.07(3) CSIS Act. Querying means “carrying out a specific search, with respect to a person or entity,
for the purpose of obtaining intelligence”. Exploitation means “a computational analysis of one or more datasets
for the purpose of obtaining intelligence that would not otherwise be apparent”. See the definitions in Section 2
CSIS Act.
630
    Defined in Section 11.01 and referencing Sections 11.04 and 11.06.
631
    Section 11.07(5) CSIS Act.

                                                        86
performance of the CSIS’ duties and functions if its deletion does not affect the integrity of
the dataset 632.

If it is determined that the information constitutes a foreign dataset, CSIS must obtain
authorisation from the Minister of Public Safety (the Minister) or a designated person within
the abovementioned 90-day period in order to retain the foreign dataset 633. The Minister or
designate may authorise CSIS to retain a foreign dataset when the retention is likely to assist
the Service in the performance of its duties and functions and any information for which there
is a reasonable expectation of privacy that relates to the physical or mental health of an
individual has been removed 634. The authorisation of the Minister must subsequently be
reviewed and approved by an independent body, the Intelligence Commissioner (IC) 635. The
IC approves the authorisation by means of a reasoned decision if (s)he considers that the
Minister’s conclusions are reasonable, possibly by imposing specific conditions 636. An
authorisation to retain a foreign dataset may be valid for a maximum period of five years from
the date on which approval from the IC is obtained 637. If no authorisation is granted by the
Minister or if the IC does not approve the ministerial authorisation, CSIS must destroy the
dataset without delay 638.

Once the Minister’s authorisation to retain the dataset is approved by the IC, the dataset may
only be queried and exploited by a limited number of designated employees at CSIS to assist
the Service in its duties and functions under specific conditions 639. A dataset may be queried
and exploited to the extent that it is strictly necessary to assist CSIS in the performance of its
duties and functions in relation to threat investigations and taking threat reduction
measures 640, or if required to assist the Ministers of National Defence or Foreign Affairs in
collecting foreign intelligence 641. In exigent circumstances, i.e., that require the querying of a
dataset to preserve the life or safety of any individual or to acquire intelligence of significant

632
    Section 11.07(6) CSIS Act.
633
    Section 11.09(2) CSIS Act. If no authorisation is requested or obtained, the dataset must be destroyed on the
day on which the 90-day period ends (Section 11.09(3) CSIS Act).
634
    Section 11.17(1) in conjunction with Section 11.1(1)-(2) CSIS Act. Such authorisation must be provided in
writing and must include, inter alia, a description of the dataset, the manner in which the CSIS may update the
dataset, the terms and conditions to query, exploit or destroy the data set, and any terms and conditions the
Minister considers advisable in the public interest (Section 11.17(2) CSIS Act).
635
    Section 11.18 CSIS Act. The IC is a retired judge of a superior court and is appointed by the Governor in
Council, on the recommendation of the Prime Minister (Section 4(1) of the Intelligence Commissioner Act, IC
Act). The IC is appointed for a renewable term of five years and has exclusive authority to appoint his/her staff
(Section 4(1),(2) IC Act). In reviewing requests for authorising the retention of foreign datasets, the IC has
access to all information that was before the person that issued the initial authorisation, including information
that is subject to any privilege (Section 23(1),(2) IC Act). The IC is prohibited from engaging in any political
activity (Sections 5, 6(3) IC Act, in conjunction with Section 117 Federal Public Service Employment Act) and
has exclusive authority to appoint and lay off personnel (Section 6(1) IC Act).
636
    Section 17 and 20(2) IC Act. The IC must provide a copy of each decision to the National Security and
Intelligence Review Agency (NSIRA), Section 21 IC Act. Moreover, the IC must report to the Prime Minister on
an annual basis on its activities, including by providing statistics on the authorisations that were approved and
not approved (Section 22(1) IC Act). This report must in turn be tabled by the Prime Minister before Parliament
(Section 22(3) IC Act).
637
    Section 11.17(3) CSIS Act.
638
    Section 11.19(1)-(2) CSIS Act.
639
    Section 11.2(3)-(4) CSIS Act.
640
    The same applies to assisting the Government with security assessments of individuals seeking security
clearances and during the visa application process or the application process for refugees and Canadian
citizenship (Section 15 CSIS Act).
641
    Section 11.2(3)-(4) CSIS Act.

                                                       87
importance to national security (the value of which would be diminished or lost if the CSIS
would be required to comply with the ordinary authorisation procedure), the Director of the
CSIS may authorise such querying even if no Ministerial authorisation to retain the dataset
has been obtained (yet) 642. However, in such cases, the IC must first review whether the
assessment carried out by the Director is reasonable and must approve the decision, before the
query can take place 643. Notably, the CSIS Act does not allow for exploitation in exigent
circumstances.

The results from queries or exploitation may only be retained where the collection, analysis
and retention of the results are carried out in performing CSIS’ functions with respect to threat
investigations; where the retention is strictly necessary to assist CSIS with the taking of threat
reduction measures 644; or where the retention is required to assist the Ministers of National
Defence or Foreign Affairs in collecting foreign intelligence 645. Any query or exploitation
result that does not satisfy abovementioned conditions must be destroyed without delay 646.

In terms of additional safeguards, any foreign dataset must be stored and managed separately
from all other information collected and retained by CSIS. In addition, only designated
employees may have access to the datasets and reasonable measures must be taken to ensure
that any information to which employees have access in only communicated for the purpose
of their duties and functions under the CSIS Act. Moreover, records must be kept on the
rationale for their collection and retention, the details of each query and exploitation, the
statutory provision under which the result of a query or exploitation is retained and the results
that were retained. CSIS is also required to verify, periodically and on a random basis, if the
queries, exploitations and retention of results were carried out in accordance with the CSIS
Act 647. Finally, CSIS must provide NSIRA with, inter alia, reports on the periodic
verifications and the authorisations of the Director to query foreign datasets in exigent
circumstances 648.

              2.3.1.2.      The Communications Security Establishment (CSE)

The CSE’s mandate covers five aspects. First, the CSE’s foreign intelligence mandate is to
acquire information from or through the global information infrastructure 649, and to use,
analyse and disseminate the information for the purpose of providing foreign intelligence, in
accordance with the Government of Canada’s intelligence priorities 650. In addition, the CSE

642
    Section 11.22 CSIS Act.
643
    Section 11.23 CSIS Act.
644
    The same applies as regards security assessments.
645
    Section 11.21(1) CSIS Act.
646
    Section 11.21(2) CSIS Act.
647
    Section 11.24(3) CSIS Act.
648
    Section 11.25 CSIS Act.
649
     Global information infrastructure includes electromagnetic emissions, any equipment producing such
emissions, communications systems, information technology systems and networks, and any data or technical
information carried on, contained in or relating to those emissions, that equipment, those systems or those
networks (Section 2 CSE Act).
650
    Section 16 CSE Act. Foreign intelligence is defined as “information or intelligence about the capabilities,
intentions or activities of a foreign individual, state, organisation or terrorist group, as they relate to international
affairs, defence or security” (Section 2 CSE Act). While there is no definition of the notion of ‘international
affairs’, the similar term ‘international relations’ has been considered by Canadian courts as information that is
related to Canada’s relationship with foreign nations. (Canada (Attorney General) v. Canada (Commission of
Inquiry) (2007), 316 F.T.R. 279 (F.C.).

                                                           88
provides advice, guidance and services to the Government of Canada and federal institutions
with respect to cybersecurity and information assurance, and in this context may also acquire,
use and analyse information from the global information infrastructure or from other
sources 651. Moreover, the CSE may carry out defensive 652 and active 653 cyber operations on
or through the global information infrastructure 654. Finally, the CSE may provide technical
and operational assistance to federal law enforcement and security agencies, the Canadian
Forces and the Department of National Defence 655.

The CSE may not direct activities carried out in furtherance of the foreign intelligence,
cybersecurity and information assurance, defensive cyber operations or active cyber
operations aspects of its mandate at Canadian individuals or corporations, or any person in
Canada 656 and may not infringe the Charter 657. Moreover, activities of the CSE as part of its
foreign intelligence, cybersecurity and (defensive or active) cyber operations mandates that
would otherwise contravene any Act of Parliament (including legislation in the foreign
country where the activity takes place) or interfere with the reasonable expectation of privacy
of a Canadian or person in Canada can only be carried out after having been authorised by the
competent Minister 658 and, for foreign intelligence and cybersecurity authorisations, approved
by the independent Intelligence Commissioner .

An authorisation for defensive and active cyber operations may be issued if there are
reasonable grounds to believe that the activity is “reasonable and proportionate, having regard
to the nature of the objective to be achieved and the nature of the activities” 659 and “the
objective of the cyber operation could not reasonably be achieved by other means” and that no
information will be acquired under the authorisation except in accordance with a (separately
issued) foreign intelligence or cybersecurity authorisation 660.

A foreign intelligence authorisation may be issued if there are reasonable grounds to believe
that 661: (1) the activity is “reasonable and proportionate, having regard to the nature of the

651
    Section 17 CSE Act. As part of the CSE’s cybersecurity mandate, the Minister may e.g., authorise the CSE to
access an information infrastructure designated as of importance to the Government of Canada or of a federal
institution and acquire any information originating from, directed to, stored on or being transmitted on or
through that infrastructure for the purpose of helping to protect it from mischief, unauthorized use or disruption
(Section 27 CSE Act).
652
    I.e., activities to help protect federal institutions’ electronic information and information infrastructures; and
electronic information and information infrastructures designated as being of importance to the Government of
Canada (Section 18 CSE Act).
653
    I.e., to degrade, disrupt, influence, respond to or interfere with the capabilities, intentions or activities of a
foreign individual, state, organisation or terrorist group as they relate to international affairs, defence or security
(Section 19 CSE Act).
654
    Such activities may not be directed at any portion of the global information infrastructure in Canada (Section
22(2) CSE Act).
655
    Section 20 CSE Act. In providing such assistance, the CSE has the authority to exercise the same powers as
federal law enforcement authorities, the Canadian Forces or the Department of National Defence, under the same
conditions and subject to the same limitations (e.g., warrant requirements) as those that apply to those authorities
(Section 25(1) CSE Act).
656
    Section 22(1) CSE Act.
657
    See also the Preamble of the CSE Act.
658
    Section 22 CSE Act.
659
    Section 34(1) CSE Act. The CSE must apply in writing to the Minister, setting out the facts that would allow
the Minister to conclude that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the authorization is necessary and that
the conditions for issuing it are met (Section 33 CSE Act).
660
    Section 34(4) CSE Act.
661
    Section 34(1) and (2) CSE Act.

                                                          89
objective to be achieved and the nature of the activities” 662 (which would require taking into
account the benefits to be achieved by the activities and any anticipated impact on privacy
interests) 663; (2) any information acquired under the authorisation “could not reasonably be
acquired by other means and will be retained for no longer than is reasonably necessary”; and
(3) if the authorisation authorises the acquisition of unselected information 664: any unselected
information could not reasonably be acquired by other means.

Similarly, a cybersecurity authorisation may be issued if there are reasonable grounds to
believe that, inter alia, (1) the activity is “reasonable and proportionate, having regard to the
nature of the objective to be achieved and the nature of the activities” 665; (2) any information
acquired will be retained for no longer than is reasonably necessary; (3) the consent of all
persons whose information may be acquired could not reasonably be obtained (in case the
activity concerns the information infrastructure of federal institutions), and (4) any
information acquired under the authorisation is necessary to identify, isolate, prevent or
mitigate harm to electronic information or information infrastructure of federal institutions or
that has been designated as being of importance to the Government of Canada.

Any authorisation issued by the Minister 666 must, inter alia, specify: (1) the activities or
classes of activities that it authorises; (2) the persons or classes of persons who are authorised
to carry out the activities or classes of activities; (3) any terms, conditions or restrictions that
the Minister considers advisable in the public interest, or advisable to ensure the
reasonableness and proportionality of any activity authorised by the authorisation; and (4) the
day on which the authorisation is issued and expires 667. In case of a foreign intelligence
authorisation, it must also specify whether the activities authorised include acquiring
unselected information, and any terms, conditions or restrictions that the Minister considers
advisable to limit the use, analysis and retention of, and access to, unselected information668.
An authorisation may be valid for a period not exceeding one year 669. An authorisation may
be repealed at any time by the Minister 670 or amended in case of a significant change in the
underlying facts (if, taking into account the significant change, there are reasonable grounds
to believe that the conditions for issuing an authorisation continue to be met) 671. Within 90
days after the expiration of an authorisation, the CSE must provide a written report to the

662
    Section 34(1) CSE Act. The CSE must apply in writing to the Minister, setting out the facts that would allow
the Minister to conclude that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the authorization is necessary and that
the conditions for issuing it are met (Section 33 CSE Act).
663
       Charter statement for Bill C-59 (which proposed the CSE Act), available at:
https://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/csj-sjc/pl/charter-charte/ns-sn.html.
664
    This refers to information that is acquired, for technical or operational reasons, without the use of terms or
criteria to identify information of foreign intelligence interest (Section 2 CSE Act).
665
    Section 34(1) CSE Act. The CSE must apply in writing to the Minister, setting out the facts that would allow
the Minister to conclude that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the authorization is necessary and that
the conditions for issuing it are met (Section 33 CSE Act).
666
    The application from the CSE to the Minister must be in writing and also contain detailed information, the
facts that would allow the Minister to conclude that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the authorization
is necessary and that the conditions for issuing it are met (Section 33 CSE Act).
667
    Section 35 CSE Act.
668
    Section 35(f) CSE Act.
669
    Section 36(2) CSE Act. Foreign intelligence and cybersecurity authorisations may be extended once by one
year, which does not require a review by the IC, but notification of the IC as soon as feasible (Section 36(3)-(4)
CSE Act.).
670
    Section 38 CSE Act.
671
    Section 39(1)-(2) CSE Act.

                                                        90
Minister on the outcome of the activities carried out, which the Minister must in turn provide
to the IC and NSIRA 672.

Foreign intelligence and cybersecurity authorisations issued by a Minister are only valid if
they are approved by the IC, who reviews whether the conclusions of the Minister are
reasonable 673 and issues a written, reasoned decision approving or not approving the
authorisation 674. In order to carry out this review, the IC must be provided with all
information that was before the Minister, including the application of the CSE, any supporting
document or (written or oral) information that was considered by the Minister, the
conclusions of the Minister and the authorisation itself 675. While the term “reasonable” is not
defined in this specific context, according to the IC it is to be interpreted in the same way as
in administrative law jurisprudence (in the context of judicial review of administrative
decisions) 676. The IC must therefore be satisfied that the Minister’s conclusions are based on a
proper justification, transparent, intelligible, and justified in relation to the relevant factual
and legal context 677. In case of a significant change in any factual element that was set out in
the application for an authorisation, the CSE must notify the Minister, who must in turn notify
the IC and NSIRA 678. Such amendment is only valid once approved by the IC 679.

A copy of each decision of the IC must be provided to the NSIRA to assist it in its review
role 680. According to its annual reports, in 2021 the IC approved two foreign intelligence
authorisations, while finding one authorisation “partially reasonable”, and approved two cyber
security authorisations 681. In 2020, the IC received (and approved) three foreign intelligence
authorisations and one cybersecurity authorisation.

In emergency situations, i.e., if the Minister believes on reasonable grounds that the
conditions for the authorisation are met, but the time required to obtain the IC’s approval
would defeat the purpose of issuing the authorisation, an authorisation may be issued and will
be valid without having been approved by the IC 682. Such an authorisation must be notified to
the IC and the NSIRA as soon as feasible after it has been issued and is valid for a maximum
period of five days 683.

        2.3.2. Further use of the information collected

The processing of personal information by CSIS and CSE is subject to the Privacy Act (see
the information provided in section 2.2.2). With respect to the further sharing of data with
other entities (within or outside Canada), the Act specifically governing the activities of the
CSIS and CSE impose specific limitations.


672
    Section 52 CSE Act.
673
    Section 13 IC Act.
674
    Section 20(1) IC Act. The decision must be taken within 30 days (Section 20(3)(b) IC Act).
675
    Section 23(1) IC Act.
676
    Available at: https://www.canada.ca/en/intelligence-commissioner/annualreport.html.
677
    See the IC’s annual report for 2020, p. 6.
678
    Section 37(1)-(3) CSE Act.
679
    Section 39(3) CSE Act.
680
    Section 21 IC Act.
681
    Available at https://www.canada.ca/en/intelligence-commissioner/annualreport.html.
682
    Section 40(1)-(2) CSE Act.
683
    Section 41 and 42 CSE Act.

                                                      91
In accordance with the CSIS Act, CSIS may not disclose any information it has obtained
except in specific, limited situations 684, e.g., (1) for the purposes of the performance of its
duties and function; (2) to a police officer or Attorney General, where the information may be
used in an investigation or prosecution of an offence; (3) to the Minister of Foreign Affairs,
where the information relates to the conduct of international affairs of Canada; (4) to the
Minister of National Defence, where the information is relevant to the defence of Canada; or
(5) to any other Minister, where necessary in the public interest, which clearly outweighs any
invasion of privacy that could result from the disclosure. Disclosures under the last ground
have to be reported to the NSIRA. The CSE may, on the basis of the CSE Act, enter into
arrangements with entities that have similar powers and duties (including of foreign states or
international organisations), for the purpose furthering its mandate, including for information
sharing or other cooperation 685. An arrangement with a foreign entity must be approved by the
competent Minister, after consultation with the Minister of Foreign Affairs.

The rules on data sharing under the CSIS Act and CSE Act are supplemented by the guidance
of the Treasury Board of Canada on the need to put in place appropriate personal information
protection safeguards in information sharing agreements/arrangements and by the Avoiding
Complicity in Mistreatment by Foreign Entities Act (ACMFEA), Directions [for Avoiding
Complicity in Mistreatment by Foreign Entities, and Ministerial Direction collectively
addressing the disclosure of information that would result in a substantial risk of mistreatment
(i.e., torture or other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment) of an individual
by a foreign entity (as described in more detail in section 2.2.2).

        2.3.3. Oversight

In Canada, the activities of national security authorities are supervised by different bodies.

First, the OPC oversees compliance of data processing by the CSIS and CSE with the Privacy
Act, in the same way as described in section 2.2.3. In its annual report of 2020 - 2021, the
OPC reported a rise in requests for consultation from national security authorities under the
Privacy Act 686. In exercising its oversight function over intelligence agencies, the OPC also
collaborate closely with NSIRA, including on the basis of a memorandum of understanding
that establishes procedures for coordination, carrying out joint reviews or investigations and
information sharing 687.

Second, independent review of the activities of the CSIS and CSE (as well as any other
activity that relates to national security or is referred to it by a Minister) is carried out by
NSIRA 688. The NSIRA may review any of the CSIS’ and CSE’s activities 689 and in this

684
    Section 19 CSIS Act.
685
    Section 54 CSE Act.
686
    https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-actions-and-decisions/ar_index/202021/ar_202021/#toc4.
687
     https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/about-the-opc/what-we-do/memorandums-of-understanding/mou-nsira/. See e.g.,
the joint review by the OPC and NSIRA of information sharing under the Security of Canada Information
Disclosure Act carried out in 2022 (https://www.priv.gc.ca/en/opc-news/news-and-announcements/2022/nr-
c_220222/).
688
    See the National Security and Intelligence Review Agency Act (NSIRA Act). The NSIRA consists of a Chair
and between three and six other members, appointed by the Governor in Council for one renewable term of five
years from among members of the Queen’s Privy Council who were not members of the Senate or the House of
Commons, after consultation by the Prime Minister with the Leader of the Opposition in the House, as well as
with the leader in the House of each party having at least twelve members in that House (Section 3-4 of the

                                                    92
context adopt any findings and recommendations it considers appropriate, including with
respect to compliance with the law or ministerial directions, as well as the reasonableness and
necessity of their exercise of powers 690. In carrying out its reviews, the NSIRA is in principle
entitled to access almost any information held by the CSIS and CSE with the exception of
confidences of the King’s Privy Council 691. The NSIRA is required to report annually to the
relevant Minister on the compliance of the activities of the two intelligence agencies with the
law and applicable Ministerial Directions, as well as the reasonableness and necessity of the
exercise of their powers 692. When finding that an activity may be contrary to the law, the
NSIRA must report this to the relevant Minister and to the Attorney General of Canada 693.
Moreover, the NSIRA must report annually on its findings and recommendations to the Prime
Minister, who in turn is required to report to the Parliament 694. The 2020 annual report of the
NSIRA indicates that it conducted two reviews of the CSIS’ activities (the use of threat
reduction measures and intelligence sharing with the RCMP) and three of the CSE’s activities
(including of ministerial authorisations and the CSE’s data retention policies and procedures
for signals intelligence) 695. The recommendations issued by the NSIRA in the context of these
reviews and the response of both agencies (which accepted the recommendations) are
described in the NSIRA’s public annual report.

Finally, parliamentary oversight in the area of national security is carried out by the National
Security and Intelligence Committee of Parliamentarians (NSICOP) 696. The NSICOP is
tasked with reviewing the legislative, regulatory, administrative, policy and financial
framework for national security and intelligence, any matter relating to national security or
intelligence that is referred to it by a Minister as well as any activity relating to national
security or intelligence, unless it concerns an ongoing operation and the competent Minister
determines that the review would be injurious to national security 697. In the latter case, the
Minister must inform the Committee that the review may be conducted once (s)he determines

NSIRA Act). The NSIRA Rules of Procedure furthermore lay down rules on conflict of interest, which for
instance require NSIRA members to withdraw from investigations in case they have any (previous) relation
(personal, business, or professional) to any person affected by the investigation (Rule 4).
689
    Section 8(1) of the NSIRA Act.
690
    Section 8(3) of the NSIRA Act.
691
    Section 9 and 10 of the NSIRA Act. The only information to which the NSIRA does not have access is a
confidence of the King’s Privy Council for Canada, consisting of personal consultants to the monarch of Canada
on state and constitutional affairs. This includes information contained in a) any memorandum the purpose of
which is to present proposals or recommendations to Council; b) any discussion paper the purpose of which is to
present background explanations, analyses of problems or policy options to Council for consideration by Council
in making decisions; c) any agendum of Council or a record recording deliberations or decisions of Council; d)
any record used for or reflecting communications or discussions between ministers of the Crown on matters
relating to the making of government decisions or the formulation of government policy; e) any record the
purpose of which is to brief Ministers of the Crown in relation to matters that are brought before, or are proposed
to be brought before, Council or that are the subject of communications or discussions referred to in paragraph
(d); and f) draft legislation.
692
    Section 32 of the NSIRA Act.
693
    Section 35 of the NSIRA Act. To the extent that such a report relates to the powers of the IC, a copy must
also be provided to him/her, see Section 36 of the NSIRA Act.
694
    Section 38 of the NSIRA Act.
695
       https://www.nsira-ossnr.gc.ca/wp-content/uploads/Annual-Report-2020-October-18-2021-FINAL-for-the-
Prime-Minister-English-for-printing-1.pdf
696
    See the National Security and Intelligence Committee of Parliamentarians Act (NSICOP Act). The NSICOP
consists of a Chair and up to ten other committee members, each of whom must be a member of Parliament
(Section 4(1) NSICOP Act). The committee members are appointed by the Governor in Council, on the
recommendation of the Prime Minister, and hold office until Parliament is dissolved.
697
    Section 8(1) and (2) NSICOP Act.

                                                        93
that review by the NSICOP would no longer be injurious to national security, or the activity is
no longer ongoing, the Minister must inform the Committee that the review may be
conducted 698. The NSICOP must inform the appropriate Minister and Attorney General of any
activity related to national security that may not be in compliance with the law 699.

In conducting its tasks, the NSICOP is entitled to have access to any information under the
control of a government department that is related to the fulfilment of the Committee’s
mandate, including information that is protected by litigation privilege, solicitor-client
privilege or the professional secrecy of advocates and notaries 700. Exceptions to this power
include a confidence of the King’s Privy Council, the identity of a confidential source of
information to the Government, or information directly relating to an ongoing investigation
carried out by a law enforcement agency that may lead to a prosecution 701. The competent
Minister may also refuse to provide information which the NSICOP is entitled to access if it
constitutes special operational information and if provision of the information would be
injurious to national security 702. In that case, the Minister must provide the refusal and the
reasons therefore to the NSICOP, as well as to the NSIRA 703.

The NSICOP submits annual reports with findings and recommendations to the Prime
Minister 704, who submits it to Parliament, subject to possible redactions where the disclosure
of specific information would be injurious to national security, national defence or
international relations, or is protected by litigation privilege or by solicitor-client privilege or
the professional secrecy of advocates and notaries 705. Such reports must also contain the
number of times that a Minister determined that a review would be injurious to national
security and the number of times that a Minister refused to provide information in the course
of a review.

        2.3.4. Redress

The Canadian system offers different avenues to obtain redress, including compensation for
damages.

First, individuals have a right of access and correction of their personal information held by
CSIS and CSE under the Privacy Act, under the same conditions as described under section
2.2.4.

Second any individual may file a complaint with the OPC in respect of any matter relating to
the handling of personal information by the CSIS and CSE, in the same way as described in
section 2.2.4.

Third, any individual may file a written complaint to the NSIRA with respect to any activity
carried out by CSIS or CSE 706. The NSIRA investigates such complaints if the complainant

698
    Section 8(3) NSICOP Act.
699
    Section 31.1 NSICOP Act.
700
    Section 13 NSICOP Act.
701
    Section 14 NSICOP Act.
702
    Section 16(1) NSICOP Act.
703
    Section 16(3) NSICOP Act.
704
    Section 21(1) NSICOP Act.
705
    Section 21(6) NSICOP Act.
706
    Section 16 of the NSIRA Act.

                                                94
has first complained to the Director of the CSIS/ Chief of CSE and has not received a
response within a reasonable time or is not satisfied with the response, and if it is satisfied that
the complaint is not trivial, frivolous, vexatious or made in bad faith (there are no further
admissibility requirements and the complainant therefore does not have to demonstrate that
(s)he has in fact been injured for the complaint to be handled). The NSIRA may attempt to
resolve the complaint informally or conduct a formal investigation 707, and may ask the
Canadian Human Rights Commission for its opinion on the complaint 708. In the course of an
investigation of a complaint, the complainant as well as the Director or concerned deputy
head must be given an opportunity to give representations, present evidence and be heard 709.
Moreover, the NSIRA has the power to summon and enforce the appearance of persons and
compel them to give oral or written evidence, as well as to produce all relevant documents 710.
If an individual is not satisfied with a decision of the NSIRA, he or she may apply to the
Federal Court for judicial review of that decision 711. In 2020, the NSIRA received 15
complaints against CSIS, of which it accepted three, and received one complaint against the
CSE. In the same year, the NSIRA closed five complaint investigations, of which three were
withdrawn by the complainant, one was resolved informally, and one was completed with a
final report.

Finally, the same judicial avenues as the ones described in section 2.2.4 (i.e., review before
the Federal Court, redress pursuant to Section 24 of the Charter, civil claims for damages 712,
or redress under Section 52 of the Constitution) are also available against CSIS and CSE.




707
    Section 23 of the NSIRA Act.
708
    Section 26 of the NSIRA Act.
709
    Section 25(2) of the NSIRA Act.
710
    Section 27 of the NSIRA Act.
711
    Section 18.1 of the Federal Courts Act.
712
    Case law has confirmed that the activities of intelligence agencies can result in civil liability, see Abdelrazik
v. Canada, [2010] F.C.J. No. 1028 (court declining to strike action alleging negligence on the part of CSIS
officials).

                                                         95
                                           IV. FAROE ISLANDS

1. RULES APPLYING TO THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA

      1.1. Relevant developments in the data protection framework of the Faroe Islands

The Commission adopted the adequacy decision for the Faroe Islands on 5 March 2010 713,
after having received the opinion of the Article 29 Working Party on 9 October 2007 714. The
decision found that, for the purposes of Article 25(2) of Directive 95/46/EC (Data Protection
Directive) 715, the Faroe Islands provided an adequate level of protection for personal data
transferred from the EU to recipients subject to the Faroese Act on Processing of Personal
Data (APPD) 716.

At the time of the adoption of the adequacy decision, the legislative framework for the
protection of personal data in the Faroe Islands consisted of the APPD, which entered into
force on 1 January 2002 and was based on the standards of the Data Protection Directive. In
August 2017, a process to modernise the APPD was initiated, which led to the adoption of a
new Data Protection Act (DPA) 717 that entered into force on 1 January 2021. As explained in
more detail below, the DPA is closely aligned with Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR) 718 and
has strengthened the Faroese data protection framework in several areas. The DPA is
accompanied by a special commentary, which refers to the GDPR and its recitals, in particular
by specifying that the GDPR is to be used when interpreting the Act.

Like the previous APPD, the new DPA has a broad scope of application, applying to both
private operators and public authorities 719. While the definitions of ‘personal data’,
‘controller’, ‘processor’ 720, ‘data subject’ and ‘processing’ (which are identical to those used

713
    Commission Decision 2010/146/EU of 5 March 2010 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the adequate protection provided by the Faeroese Act on processing of personal
data, OJ L 58, 9.3.2010, p. 17.
714
     Opinion 9/2007 on the level of protection of personal data in the Faroe Islands, available at:
https://ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2007/wp142_en.pdf
715
    Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data.
716
    Act No. 73 of 8 May 2001; Act on Processing of Personal Data.
717
    Act No. 80 of 7 June 2020; Act on the protection of personal data (Data Protection Act).
718
    Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).
719
    Article 2 and 3(1) DPA and, previously, Article 3(1)-(2) APPD. As explained in more detail in section 2.1,
the DPA does not apply to the processing of personal data in the course of activities carried out by Danish
authorities in the Faroe Islands (such as the High Commissioner of the Faroe Islands, the Court of the Faroe
Islands and law enforcement authorities). The DPA also contains a partial exclusion from the scope of
application for data processing exclusively for artistic, literary or journalistic purposes and for data processing in
databases with already published materials for journalistic purposes (Article 3(3)-(4) DPA). In particular, only
Chapter 8 (remedies, liability and penalties), as well as Articles 41, 42 (requirements for controllers that engage
a processor) and 47 (data breach notification) apply to such processing. Similar to what is provided by Article 85
GDPR, these activities are subject to specific safeguards provided by a separate act (Act No. 45 of 16 May 2006
on Media Responsibility) to reconcile the right to the protection of personal data with the freedom of expression
and information. This Act in particular requires that the content and conduct of mass media is in conformity with
sound press ethics (Article 34 of the Act) and provides individuals with a specific redress possibility before the
Faroese Press Council (Articles 43, 44 and 49 of the Act).
720
    Already under the APPD, data processing by a processor had to be governed by a written contract between
the parties, specifying that processors may only act on instructions from the controller (Article 31(2) APPD).
The DPA has further clarified the relationship between controllers and processors, by listing in more detail the

                                                         96
in the GDPR) have not changed compared to the previous APPD 721, the DPA has brought
even more convergence with the GDPR, e.g., by introducing a definition of
‘pseudonymisation’ 722 and further clarifying when a person is ‘identifiable’ by applying the
same criteria of recital 26 of the GDPR 723. The DPA has also extended the territorial scope of
the Faroese data protection rules by adopting the same approach as Article 3 of the GDPR 724.

The main data protection principles and obligations that were already provided by the APPD
at the time of the adoption of the adequacy decision have remained in place without
substantial changes. This is the case for the principles of purpose limitation 725, data quality
and proportionality 726, data retention 727 and data security 728. At the same time, a number of
principles and obligations have been further strengthened, in particular in the context of the
recent reforms, e.g., the principle of lawfulness of processing, the requirements for data
breach notification, the transparency obligations and the principle of accountability.

As regards the principle of lawfulness and fairness of processing, the DPA has reduced and
further clarified the grounds that are available for processing, which are now identical to those
listed in Article 6(1) GDPR 729. Furthermore, the requirements for valid consent have been
reinforced under the DPA, by making clear that, in addition to being freely given, specific and
informed 730, consent must be unambiguous and expressed by a clear affirmative action 731.

Similarly, the DPA has strengthened the existing transparency obligations by requiring that
additional information is provided to the individual (e.g., the contact details of the data
protection officer, the fact that the controller intends to transfer the data to a third country, the
retention period, the right to withdraw consent, the existence of automated decision-making,
etc.) 732 when data is collected directly from the individual 733 or from third parties 734 and when


elements that should be reflected in such a contract, similar to what is provided in Article 28 of the GDPR
(Article 41 DPA).
721
    See Articles 2, 6(1), (2), (6) and (7) DPA.
722
    Article 6(4) DPA.
723
    See the special commentary on Article 6(1) DPA and, previously, Article 2(1) APPD.
724
     See Article 5(2) DPA. The territorial scope of the previous APPD was more limited, as it applied to
controllers not established in the Faroe Islands if (1) the processing of data is carried out with the use of
equipment situated in the Faroe Islands (unless such equipment is used only for purposes of transit), or (2) the
collection of data in the Faroe Islands takes place for the purpose of processing in a foreign country (i.e. where a
controller that is not located in the Faroe Islands offers goods or services directly to data subjects in the Faroe
Islands and in that context collects personal data) (Article 7(2) APPD).
725
    Article 7(1) lit. 2 DPA and, previously, Article 8(1) lit. 2 and 4 APPD.
726
    Article 7(1) lit. 3 and 4 DPA and, previously, Article 8(1) lit. 3 and 6, as well as Article 27 APPD.
727
    Article 7(1) lit. 5 DPA and, previously, Article 8(1) lit. 5 APPD.
728
    Article 7(1) lit. 6 DPA and, previously, Article 31(3) APPD, in conjunction with Executive Order No. 28 of
27 February 2003 on Security in relation to processing of personal data.
729
    Article 8 DPA. See also Articles 8(1) and 9 APPD, which provided two additional legal bases for processing,
i.e., where the processing is subject to statutory authority (i.e., authorised or laid down by law) and when
necessary for the performance of a task carried out in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller or
a third party to whom the personal data are disclosed.
730
    Article 2(8) APPD defined consent as “[…] any freely given, specific and informed indication of his wishes
by which the data subject signifies his agreement to personal data relating to him being processed.”
731
    Article 6(10) DPA. Moreover, Article 9(2) DPA requires that, if consent is given in the context of a written
declaration that also concerns other matters, the request for consent must be presented in a manner that is clearly
distinguishable from other matters, in an intelligible and easily accessible form, using clear and plain language.
732
     Under Articles 20 and 21 APPD, controllers were required to provide the following information when
collecting personal data from the individual: the name and address of the controller/his representative, the
purposes of processing and its name (i.e. information on the type of processing), the recipients to whom personal

                                                         97
it is further processed 735. The exceptions to transparency requirements have also been
narrowed and further clarified. In particular, under the DPA, the transparency obligations do
not apply in limited circumstances, e.g., if disclosing the information would endanger national
security or jeopardise the investigation of a criminal offence 736. In this respect, the special
commentary clarifies that to rely on an exception, a concrete assessment should be made in
each individual case. Restrictions could only be made if a concrete assessment leads to the
conclusion that the information, if disclosed, would fall under one of the exceptions.

With respect to the principle of data security, the DPA expanded the requirements on
reporting data breaches. While controllers were already required to notify data breaches to the
Data Protection Agency 737, the DPA has clarified the modalities for such notifications, e.g.,
by specifying that breaches should be reported without undue delay (and where feasible
within 72 hours), and exempting data breaches that are unlikely to result in a risk to the rights
of individuals 738. Moreover, the DPA introduced a requirement to notify data breaches to the
concerned individuals, where it is likely to result in a high risk to their rights 739.

The DPA has also modernised the accountability requirements that applied under the previous
regime (e.g., on record keeping and risk assessments) 740, by introducing an obligation to
implement principles of data protection by design and by default, keep records of processing,
appoint a data protection officer and carry out data protection impact assessments (and consult
the Data Protection Agency prior to processing where a data protection impact assessment
indicates that the processing would result in a high risk in the absence of measures taken by
the controller to mitigate the risk) 741.

In addition to the strengthening of data protection principles and obligations, the protections
for special categories of data have been reinforced since the adoption of the adequacy
decision. The APPD already offered additional protection for data about colour and family
bonds; religion, philosophy, or political conviction; sexual life; health; trade union
connections; relative social problems and other private concerns 742. The DPA has codified the
existing interpretation of “colour and family bonds,” “sexual life” and “data about health” by

data is disclosed, whether or not the data subject is obliged to provide the data and the possible consequences
failing to do so, as well as other information necessary for the data subject in order to exercise his or her rights.
733
    Article 23 DPA. Similar to Article 13(4) GDPR, this does not apply where and insofar as the data subject
already has the information (see Article 23(4) DPA).
734
    Article 24 DPA. This obligation is subject to several exceptions, which are similar to the exceptions listed in
Article 14(5) GDPR. Where an exception applies, the controller must take appropriate measures to protect
individual rights, including by making the information publicly available (see Article 25(3) DPA).
735
    Article 23(3) DPA.
736
    Article 36(1) DPA. See also Article 22(1) APPD, which laid down exceptions to the transparency obligations
under the old regime.
737
    Article 6 of Executive Order No. 28 of 27 February 2003 on Security in relation to processing of personal
data. Although the Order only referred to the processing of personal that requires confidentiality/privacy the
Data Protection Agency applied a wide interpretation, requiring any processing of personal data to comply with
the Order.
738
    Article 47 DPA.
739
    Article 48 DPA.
740
    See Articles 4, 5, 8 and 16 of Executive Order No. 28 of 27 February 2003 on Security in relation to
processing of personal data.
741
    Articles 38, 44, 49, 52 and 53 DPA.
742
    Article 2(9) APPD. The notion of “colour and family bonds” also covered data revealing racial and ethnic
origin, while ‘sexual life’ included data concerning sexual orientation. In addition, ‘data about health’ covered
genetic information.

                                                         98
explicitly mentioning data revealing racial and ethnic origin, sexual orientation and genetic
data in the list of special categories of data 743 and included biometric data processed for the
purpose of uniquely identifying a natural person 744. As regards the safeguards that apply to
the processing of special categories of data, the DPA has replaced the previous requirement to
obtain prior authorisation from the Data Protection Agency 745 by a general prohibition on
processing, only allowing the processing of such data in a limited number of situations 746. For
example, similarly to the GDPR, the DPA allows the processing of special categories of data
where the data subject has given explicit consent, where processing is based on a law, where
processing is necessary to protect the vital interest of the data subject, or where processing is
necessary for reasons of substantial public interest 747.

The DPA has also modernised the APPD’s provisions on data subject rights, which included a
right to obtain information, a right of insight (i.e., access) and the rights of rectification,
erasure and blocking 748. In particular, the DPA contains updated provisions on the rights of
rectification, erasure 749, restriction and object (also including a general right to object to the
processing of personal data for direct marketing purposes) that correspond to the rights
provided by the GDPR, both as regards the conditions under which these rights can be
exercised and possible exceptions 750. In addition, the right of access has been further
strengthened, by not only requiring controllers to provide individuals with information about
the processing of their data (as was already the case under the APPD) 751, but also to give
access to personal data (including by providing a copy) 752. The DPA has also further
circumscribed the exceptions to the right of access, which only apply in limited
circumstances, e.g., if disclosing the information would endanger national security or
jeopardise the investigation of a criminal offence 753, and, according to the special
commentary, must be applied on a case-by-case basis.

Moreover, the DPA introduced new rights. This includes a right for individuals not to be
subject to a decision based solely on automated processing, including profiling, which
produces legal effects concerning them or similarly significantly affect them 754. Such


743
    In addition, personal data relating to criminal convictions and offences are considered to be part of the special
categories of data (Article 11(1) DPA) and benefit from specific protections.
744
    Article 11(1) DPA. Biometric data is defined in Article 6(12) DPA as “personal data resulting from specific
technical processing relating to the physical, physiological or behavioural characteristics of a natural person,
which allow or confirm the unique identification of that natural person, such as facial images or dactyloscopy
data”.
745
    Article 10(1) APPD.
746
    Article 12, 18 and 19 DPA.
747
    Articles 12 DPA.
748
    Articles 18, 19 and 27 APPD.
749
     This for example also includes an obligation for the controller to take reasonable steps to inform other
controllers that are processing information that the data subject has requested to erase (Article 28(2) DPA).
750
    Articles 27, 28, 29, 32 and 33 DPA.
751
    Under the DPA, the controller must provide the same information as under the old APPD (the name and
address of the controller or his representative, the purpose of processing, the categories of personal data that is
being processed, the source of personal data etc.), as well as information on the retention period, the right to
lodge a complaint with the Data Protection Agency, the existence of other rights, the fact that the controller
intends to transfer the data to third countries, and the existence of automated decision-making (Article 26(1) and
(2) DPA).
752
    Article 26 DPA.
753
    Article 36(2) DPA. See also Article 22(1) APPD, which laid down exceptions under the old regime.
754
    Article 35 DPA.

                                                         99
automated decision making may only take place under certain conditions (e.g., only if
authorised by law or based on the data subject’s explicit consent) and subject to specific
safeguards (e.g., informing the individual about the processing and the envisaged
consequences) 755. In addition, the DPA introduced a right to data portability that corresponds
to the same right available under the GDPR 756.

The DPA has also introduced several changes to the rules on international transfers (onward
transfers for the purpose of the adequacy decision) 757. In particular, the regime of the APPD
that allowed international transfers on the basis of a specific transfer instrument (an adequacy
decision adopted by the Minister of Justice, adequate safeguards or certain statutory grounds)
after obtaining prior permission from the Data Protection Agency has been updated 758. The
DPA abolished the prior authorisation requirement and allows transfers to non-EEA countries
under the same conditions as the GDPR. In particular, as a general principle, the special
commentary clarifies that the rules on international transfers are intended to ensure that the
level of protection ensured by the DPA will not be lowered, which also applies when personal
data are onward transferred from the third country to which they were transferred from the
Faroe Islands.

Moreover, as was the case under the APPD, different instruments can be used for data
transfers. First, the Minister of Justice can adopt an adequacy decision, for which the special
commentary specifies that the same elements as those provided by Article 45 GDPR have to
be taken into account and adequacy decisions adopted by the European Commission may be
taken into account. In practice, the same countries that have received an adequacy decision
from the Commission under the Data Protection Directive have been recognised by the Faroe
Islands, with the addition of Gibraltar 759. In addition, a transfer may take place on the basis of
appropriate safeguards (by means of a legally binding and enforceable instrument between
public authorities, standard data protection clauses adopted by the Minister or contractual
clauses approved by the Data Protection Agency), on the condition that enforceable data
subject rights and effective legal remedies are available to the data subject. In particular, the
Minister has approved the standard contractual clauses for the transfer of personal data to
third countries set out in the Commission implementing decision (EU) 2021/914. Finally, the
DPA allows transfers on the basis of ‘derogations’ 760, which correspond to those provided by
Article 49 GDPR and which, according to the special commentary, have a narrow scope and
cannot be relied upon for regular and repeated transfers.

      1.2. Oversight, enforcement and redress

The independent entity in charge of overseeing compliance with the data protection rules is
the Data Protection Agency. The Agency supervises compliance of any processing activity,
either on its own initiative or on the basis of complaints from data subjects 761. In addition, it

755
    Article 23(2) lit. 6, Article 24(2) lit. 7 and Article 35 DPA.
756
    Article 31 DPA.
757
    According to the DPA, the rules on international transfers apply to any transfer of personal data to countries
that are not part of the EEA (Article 59 in conjunction with Article 6(14) DPA).
758
    Article 16(1) and Article 17(2) APPD.
759
    See Executive Order No. 31 of 21 March 2019 on transfer of Personal Data to Foreign Countries.
760
    Article 62 and 63 DPA
761
    Article 68, lit. 1 DPA and, previously, Article 37, lit. 1 APPD.

                                                      100
carries out a number of tasks, such as promoting public awareness in relation to data
protection, giving its opinion on administrative and legislative measures relating to data
protection, promoting the awareness of controllers and processors of their obligations,
monitoring and informing of relevant developments regarding data protection on the Faroe
Islands and abroad, and publishing annual reports on its activities 762. In performing its
supervisory duties, the Agency has access to all relevant information, as well as to the
premises where processing operations are carried out or administered and where data or
technical equipment are stored or used 763.

Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, both the resources and powers of the Agency
have been strengthened. In particular, the number of members of the Agency (i.e., the
Council) has increased from three under the APPD (a chair and two other members) to five
under the new DPA (a chair and four members, two of which are nominated by the
Association of Municipalities and the Faroe Employer’s Association) 764. Furthermore, the
number of staff members of the Agency has doubled, from three to six members of staff. To
further strengthen the independence of the Council, the special commentary to the DPA
provides that the members must remain free from external influence, whether direct or
indirect, and may neither seek nor take instructions from anybody. In addition, the budget of
the Agency has increased in the past years, from 2.0 million DKK (~ 268 000€) in 2018 and
2.445 million DKK (~ 324 000€) in 2018, to 3.252 million DKK (~ 435 000€) in 2020.

Under the former APPD, compliance with data protection requirements was ensured through a
combination of different measures, including notification, prior authorisation, corrective
measures (issued by the Data Protection Agency) and criminal sanctions (i.e., fines or
imprisonment, imposed by the Prosecution Service) 765. The new DPA has strengthened the
enforcement powers of the Data Protection Agency, while abolishing most prior notification
and authorisation requirements.

The DPA has provided the Agency with a broad range of powers, in particular to issue
warnings, reprimands and orders (inter alia to discontinue processing, bring processing into
compliance with the Act, implement security measures and rectify, erase or restrict
processing), and to make its decisions public 766. The DPA also introduced the possibility for
the Data Protection Agency to issue a fixed penalty notice 767, i.e., a fine that may be imposed
where an infringement is estimated not to result in a penalty higher than a fine, if the
concerned entity admits to being guilty and accepts the fine indicated in the notice within a
specified time limit. This procedure deviates from the general principle that the police,
prosecution service and courts handle criminal cases and allows the settle a case without legal
proceedings. Because of the criminal nature of a penalty notice, it may only be issued for
infringements that are simple and where there is no evidentiary doubt.



762
    Article 68 and 74 DPA.
763
    Article 71 DPA and, previously, Article 40 APPD.
764
    Article 66 and 67(2) DPA and, previously, Article 36(3) APPD.
765
    See Article 32-35 APPD, as well as Executive Order No. 124 of 19 September 2011 on Notification and
Exemption from the Rules on Authorisations.
766
    Articles 70 and 73 DPA.
767
    Article 79 DPA.

                                                 101
In addition to the powers of the Data Protection Agency, the new DPA has also retained a
regime of criminal sanctions, e.g., for violations of the provisions on data protection
principles, the obligations for controllers and processors, international transfers, and
individual rights 768. As regards the amount of fines, the special commentary provides that the
Faroese authorities should take into account the same factors as those listed in Article 83(2)
GDPR, i.e., the intentional or negligent character of the infringement, any action taken by the
controller or processor to mitigate the damage suffered by data subjects, duration of the
infringement etc. Moreover, as a starting point, the level of fines on the Faroe Islands should
follow the developments in Denmark under the GDPR.

As regards possibilities for individuals to obtain redress, the Faroese system continues to offer
various avenues, including the possibility to lodge a complaint with the Data Protection
Agency 769, obtain judicial redress directly against controllers and processors (both private
operators and public authorities) 770 and obtain compensation for damages 771.

Despite its relatively small office, the Data Protection Agency plays an active role, both when
it comes to its engagement with stakeholders and exercising its oversight role.

In particular, according to information received from the Faroese authorities, the Data
Protection Agency annually handles a number of files, including inspections, notifications,
written questions, complaints and proposals for legislation. For example, in 2022, 379 files
were handled and 319 in 2023. In the context of the Covid-19 pandemic, the Agency also
advised the Faroese Government on issues relating to data protection (e.g., as regards the
processing of sensitive data as part the testing strategy). Moreover, since the entry into force
of the new DPA, the Data Protection Agency handled over 500 files, as part of which it
received more than 22 notifications of data breaches and launched more than 28 data
protection inspections. It also sent questionnaires to various controllers investigating different
aspects of compliance with the new Act. This has already led to enforcement action in several
cases, including reprimands and orders demanding that processing be brought into line with
the new Act.

Finally, since June 2020, when the new DPA was passed by the Faroese parliament, the Data
Protection Agency issued over 20 guidelines (e.g., on data protection officers, data protection
in the workplace, data breaches, consent and data subject rights) and around ten templates
(e.g., for notifying data breaches). The Agency also engages in various outreach activities,
such as presentations and courses for both the private and public sector (so far reaching


768
    The special commentary to the DPA clarifies that, in accordance with Article 19 of the Criminal Code, this
covers both intentional and negligent infringements of the DPA. For public authorities, Article 27(2) of the
Criminal Code applies. This Article provides that public authorities in the Faroe Islands may not be punished for
infringements committed in their exercise of official authority (e.g., when adopting a decision). Public
authorities may only be punished in the exercise of activity that corresponds to or can be considered equal to
activity carried through by private entities.
769
    Article 76 DPA and, previously, Article 30 APPD. Decisions of the Data Protection Agency may furthermore
be appealed before the Faroese Courts on the basis of Article 255 of the Administration of Justice Act.
770
    In particular, in accordance with Article 255 of the Administration of Justice Act, any individual who has a
legal interest in the outcome of a case, can bring a case before a court. According to information received from
the Faroese Government, this requirement would always be fulfilled if a provision of the APPD/new DPA has
been violated.
771
    Article 77 DPA and, previously, Article 46 APPD.

                                                      102
around 1000 participants) and launched a new website, as well as a podcast series about data
protection.

2. ACCESS TO AND USE OF PERSONAL DATA TRANSFERRED FROM THE
   EUROPEAN UNION BY PUBLIC AUTHORITIES IN THE FAROE ISLANDS

      2.1. General legal framework

The Faroe Islands enjoy a special status as an autonomous nation within the Danish Kingdom,
regulated by the Home Rule Act of 1948 (Act No. 137 of 23 March 1948). Whereas certain
aspects (the Constitution, the foreign exchange and monetary policy, the Supreme Court and
the foreign, defence and security policy) always remain under Danish authority, the Takeover
Act (Act No. 578 of 24 June 2005) provides the Faroe Islands with the possibility to assume
legislative and executive power in all other areas. If the Faroe Islands decide not to take over
a certain area, it remains under the jurisdiction of Denmark 772. This is the case for the
activities of the police, the prosecution service, the prison and probation service and the
courts, which have not been taken over by the Faroe Islands. Given that criminal law
enforcement and national security therefore remain under Danish jurisdiction, activities in
these areas in the Faroe Islands are exercised exclusively by Danish authorities 773. As
explained in more detail below, these authorities are subject to laws under Danish auspices
that, after having been approved by the Faroese Parliament, have been put into force in the
Faroe Islands by an Executive Order of the Danish government.

The limitations and safeguards that apply to the collection and subsequent use of personal
data by public authorities on the territory of the Faroe Islands for criminal law enforcement
and national security purposes follow from the overarching constitutional framework of the
Danish Kingdom, specific laws regulating data access, as well as rules that apply to the
processing of personal data.

Firstly, Section 72 of the Danish Constitution guarantees the right to privacy. It stipulates that
no house search, seizure, examination of letters and other papers, or any breach of secrecy in
postal, telegraph and telephone matters may take place except under a judicial order, unless a
particular exception is warranted by statute.

In addition, the European Convention on Human Rights applies to the Faroe Islands. The
European Convention on Human Rights protects the right to respect for private and family life
(and the right to the protection of personal data as part of it). In particular, pursuant to Article
8 of that Convention, a public authority may only interfere with the right to privacy in
accordance with the law, in the interests of one of the aims set out in Article 8(2), and if
proportionate in light of that aim. Article 8 also requires that the interference is “foreseeable”,
i.e., has a clear, accessible basis in law, and that the law contains appropriate safeguards to
prevent abuse.



772
    Therefore, the below assessment is limited to the application of the law that applies in the Faroe Islands as the
law of a third country. Where Danish law is applicable, reference is made to its relevant provisions.
773
    In other areas, activities are exercised by Faroese public authorities, on the basis of legislation adopted by the
Faroe Islands, including the new Data Protection Act of January 2021 (See Article 5(1) DPA. All DPA
requirements, as described in detail in section 1.1, apply to the activities of such authorities).

                                                        103
In addition, in its case law, the European Court of Human Rights has specified that any
interference with the right to privacy and data protection should be subject to an effective,
independent and impartial oversight system that must be provided for either by a judge or by
another independent body (e.g., an administrative authority or a parliamentary body)774.
Moreover, individuals must be provided with an effective remedy, and the European Court of
Human Rights has clarified that the remedy must be offered by an independent and impartial
body which has adopted its own rules of procedure, consisting of members that must hold or
have held high judicial office or be experienced lawyers, and that there must be no evidential
burden to be overcome in order to lodge an application with it. In undertaking its examination
of complaints by individuals, the independent and impartial body should have access to all
relevant information, including closed materials. Finally, it should have the powers to remedy
non-compliance 775.

Therefore, through its adherence to the European Convention on Human Rights, as well as its
submission to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights, the Faroe Islands is
subject to a number of obligations, enshrined in international law, that frame its system of
government access on the basis of principles, safeguards and individual rights similar to those
guaranteed under EU law and applicable to the Member States.

Secondly, as explained in more detail in section 2.2.1 and 2.3.1, these general principles are
reflected in specifics laws that regulate the access and use of personal data for criminal law
enforcement and national security purposes and impose minimum safeguards. This includes in
particular the Faroese Administration of Justice Act 776.

Thirdly, the processing of personal data by public authorities for criminal law enforcement
and national security purposes is subject to specific data protection rules. Danish law
enforcement authorities in the Faroe Islands are subject to the Act on the Processing of
Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities that was set into force in the Faroe Islands on
1 July 2022 777. This Act essentially transposes the legislation that was adopted by Denmark to
implement Directive (EU) 2016/680 (Law Enforcement Directive) in the Faroe Islands, with
minor adaptions to reflect the local conditions (for instance removing references to
cooperation in/with the European Data Protection Board) 778. It inter alia provides for key data
protection principles (e.g., purpose limitation, data minimisation, data accuracy, data
security), obligations for law enforcement authorities (e.g., on the processing of sensitive data,
international data transfers, notification of data breaches, etc.) and rights for individuals (e.g.,
to obtain access, correction or deletion of personal data). In addition, the Act is complemented
by several Executive Orders that have been put into force in the Faroe Islands:



774
    European Court of Human Rights, Klass and others v. Germany, Application no. 5029/71, paragraphs 17-51.
775
    European Court of Human Rights, Kennedy v. the United Kingdom, Application no. 26839/05, (Kennedy),
paragraphs 167 and 190.
776
    Administration of Justice Act for the Faroe Islands (Act No. 964 of 26 June 2020).
777
    Ordinance No. 1034 of 29 June 2022 on the entry into force of the Act on the Processing of Personal Data for
the Faroe Islands.
778
    Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of
natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of the
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties,
and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA.

                                                     104
    (1) Executive Order No. 1051 of 12 September 2017 for the Faroe Islands on security
        measures for the protection of personal data processed by the public administration 779;

    (2) Executive Order No. 1058 of 12 September 2017 for the Faroe Islands on derogating
        from the obligation to notify certain proceedings carried out by the public
        administration 780;

    (3) Executive Order No. 1057 of 12 September 2017 for the Faroe Islands derogating
        from the obligation to notify certain proceedings conducted by the courts 781;

    (4) Executive Order No. 1059 of 12 September 2017 for the Faroe Islands on security
        measures for the protection of personal data processed before the courts 782;

    (5) Executive Order No. 442 of 16 March 2021 on Processing of Personal Data in the
        Central Criminal Register (Order no. 442 of 16 March 2021 for the Faroe Islands) 783.

In the area of national security, the Act on the Security and Intelligence Service 784 (ASIS)
governs the activities of the Danish Security and Intelligence Service in the Faroe Islands with
regard to the collection and (further) processing of personal data for national security
purposes. This Act was set into force on the Faroe Islands on 1 January 2021 and mirrors the
Danish Act on the Security and Intelligence Service, with some adaptations for the local
Faroese situation. As explained in more detail in section 2.3.2, under the Act, all core
principles (lawfulness, purpose limitation, data minimisation, data accuracy, storage
limitation), individual rights and data protection obligations (e.g., rules on international
transfers) apply 785. The Act is complemented by two Executive Orders:

    (1) Executive Order for the Faroe Islands on security measures to protect information
        about natural and legal persons processed by the Danish Security and Intelligence
        Service (Order No.254 of 22 February 2021, DSIS Order on security measures) 786;

    (2) Executive Order for the Faroe Islands on the Danish Security and Intelligence
        Service’s processing of information on natural and legal persons, etc. (Order No. 253
        of 22 February 2021, EOFIDSIS) 787.


779
    This Order specifies in more detail what is required from controllers with respect to security, e.g., with
respect to internal rules, instructions to staff, requirements when using processors, access management, log
keeping etc.
780
    This Order provides certain exceptions from the general obligation to notify the Data Protection Authority of
processing activities, e.g., personal data that is not sensitive or of a confidential nature, personal data processed
in the context of staff management systems, library systems, etc.
781
    This Order exempts courts from notifying the data protection authority with respect to the processing of
human resources data.
782
    This Order specifies in more detail what security measures should be put in place by courts, e.g., with respect
to internal rules, the use of processors, access management, log keeping, etc.
783
    This Order regulates the processing of personal data regarding criminal cases.
784
    Ordinance No. 1623 of 17 November 2020 on the entry into force of the Act on the Security and Intelligence
Service for the Faroe Islands.
785
    Sections 6a, 7 and 9a ASIS.
786
    This Order specifies the security measures the Service must take to ensure appropriate security of the data that
it processes, including measures to protect against unauthorised or unlawful processing and against accidental
loss, destruction or damage.
787
    This Order contains provisions on the Service’s files, databases etc. (Chapter 1); security of processing
(Chapter 2); The Service’s own personnel cases and security clearance cases (Chapter 3); the procedure for the

                                                        105
These general limitations and safeguards can be invoked by individuals before independent
oversight bodies (e.g., the Danish data protection authority, the Intelligence Oversight Board)
and courts to obtain redress (see sections 2.2.4 and 2.3.4).

    2.2. Access and use by public authorities in the Faroe Islands for criminal law
         enforcement purposes

The legal framework that applies to criminal law enforcement authorities in the Faroe Islands
imposes a number of limitations on the access and use of personal data for criminal law
enforcement purposes and provides oversight and redress mechanisms. The conditions under
which such access can take place and the safeguards applicable to the use of those powers are
described in the following sections.

         2.2.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

Personal data transferred from the EU on the basis of the adequacy decision and subsequently
processed by Faroese controllers or processors may be collected by Danish authorities (i.e.,
the Danish police) for criminal law enforcement purposes in the context of a search or seizure,
on the basis of a production order, by accessing communications or by collecting location data
through telecommunications observation. The conditions, limitations and safeguards that
apply to the use of these powers are laid down in the Faroese Administration of Justice Act.
This Act lays down clear and precise rules on the scope of application of these measures,
thereby ensuring that the interference with the rights of individuals will be limited to what is
necessary for a specific criminal investigation and proportionate to the pursued purpose. As
explained in more detail below, prior judicial authorisation is in principle required in order to
access personal data, unless in exceptional cases specifically listed in the Act. Moreover,
specific (procedural) safeguards exist to guarantee due process rights for individuals.

First, searches of places, documents (including electronic documents), objects, papers, etc. 788
may in principle only take place if the targeted person is suspected on reasonable grounds of
an offence that is subject to public prosecution and the search may be presumed to be of major
importance to the investigation 789. To perform searches of accommodation, documents,
papers and the content of locked objects, additional requirements must be met, i.e., the
investigation must concern an offence punishable by imprisonment or there must be specific
reasons to presume that evidence will be found 790. With regard to searches concerning a
person who is not a suspect, a higher threshold applies: such a search may only be conducted
if the person consents to the search 791 or if the investigation concerns an offence punishable
by imprisonment and there are specific reasons to presume that the search will produce

examination and approval of certain investigative measures (Chapter 4); collection and disclosure of information
(Chapter 5); internal auditing (Chapter 6); information to be provided to the Intelligence Oversight Board
(Chapter 7); retention for public archives (Chapter 8).
788
    Section 836(1) Administration of Justice Act.
789
    Section 837(1) Administration of Justice Act. According to the preparatory work for the Administration of
Justice Act, this Section corresponds to Section 794(1) of the Danish Administration of Justice Act, which also
uses the term “suspected on reasonable grounds”, and is inter alia interpreted in accordance with relevant case
law. For example, case law in Denmark found that an anonymous tip about the presence of narcotics in a
building was not sufficient to suspect all residents (U.1999.1670.Ø) and that a search of a private property on the
basis of an anonymous tip was not justified without further documented details on the tip (U.2013.3047/2).
790
    Section 837(2) Administration of Justice Act.
791
    Section 838(1) Administration of Justice Act.

                                                       106
evidence 792. In all cases, a search is not allowed where, considering the purpose of the
measure, the significance of the case, and the intrusion and inconvenience that the measure
may be presumed to cause, the measure would be disproportionate 793.

Procedurally, searches of accommodation, documents or papers may in principle only be
conducted on the basis of a court order that contains information on the specific
circumstances of the case demonstrating that the abovementioned conditions are met 794.
Where the purpose of the search would be defeated by applying for a court order (i.e., if the
search would no longer lead to the collection of evidence in the investigation if it would be
delayed to obtain a court order), a search may take place without a court order, upon a
decision of the police 795. In principle, persons whose accommodation, premise or object is to
be searched are informed of and/or present at the search (whether the search is conducted on
the basis of a court order or not) 796. This requirement may only be derogated from under
certain conditions (in particular if it is of crucial importance for the investigation that the
search is conducted without the knowledge of the suspect and others, and only with respect to
investigations of intentional violations of certain crimes, such as crimes against the
independence of the State) and on the basis of a court order 797.

Second, seizures may be conducted to secure evidence; to secure the State’s claim for legal
costs, confiscation and fines; to secure the victim’s claim for restoration or compensation, and
where the accused has evaded prosecution 798. Any seizure may only take place as part of an
investigation of an offence subject to public prosecution 799, if there is reason to presume that
the object may serve as evidence or should be confiscated, or if the object was taken from
someone during the offence who can claim it back 800. A production order requiring a person
who is not a suspect to produce or surrender objects may be issued under the same
conditions 801. A seizure may not take place and a production order may not be issued if the
measure is disproportionate in light of the significance of the case and the loss or
inconvenience that the measure is likely to cause 802. Moreover, a seizure or production order
may only be conducted/issued to the least extent necessary. If the purpose of the measure may




792
    Section 838(1) Administration of Justice Act.
793
    Section 840(1) Administration of Justice Act. This assessment must also take into account whether the search
involves destruction or damage to objects, see Section 840(2) of the Act.
794
    Section 839(2) Administration of Justice Act.
795
    Section 839(3) Administration of Justice Act. Upon request from the person against whom the measure is
directed, the police are required, as soon as possible, and at the latest within 24 hours, to bring the case before
the court, which will then determine by court order whether the measure may be approved. The decision to
conduct a search of objects other than documents and papers or of premises other than accommodation that are
in the possession of a suspect is always taken by the police (Section 839(1) Administration of Justice Act).
Similarly, if a search concerns accommodation, premises or objects in the possession of a suspect, and the
suspect gives written consent to the search, the decision to conduct the search may also be taken by the police
(Section 839(5) Administration of Justice Act).
796
    Section 841(2)-(3) Administration of Justice Act.
797
    Section 842 Administration of Justice Act.
798
    Section 844(1) Administration of Justice Act.
799
    Section 845(1) and 846(1) of the Administration of Justice Act.
800
    Section 845(1) and 846(1) of the Administration of Justice Act.
801
    Section 848(1) Administration of Justice Act.
802
    Section 849(1) Administration of Justice Act.

                                                       107
be achieved by less intrusive means, a written agreement to this effect may be concluded with
the person against whom the measure is directed 803.

Seizures and production orders may only take place/be issued when authorised by a court
order, which must contain information on the specific circumstances of the case
demonstrating that the abovementioned conditions are met 804. If the purpose of the
seizure/production order would be defeated by waiting for a court order, the
objects/information may be obtained without a court order 805. In that case, the person against
whom the measure is directed may request that the case is brought before the court (as soon as
possible and at the latest within 24 hours) to determine whether the seizure/production order
can be approved 806. In principle, the person against whom a seizure is directed is informed
thereof when the measure is initiated, unless upon a court decision finding that it is of crucial
importance to the investigation that it is conducted without the knowledge of the suspect or
others 807.

Third, the police may intercept communications and collect information on communications
(e.g., through telephone tapping, the interception of mail, or by obtaining information on
which devices are connected to a phone number or communication device) 808. These
measures may only be carried out under strict conditions: (1) there must be specific grounds
for supposing that information is being passed or items sent to or from a suspect 809; (2) the
measures may be assumed to be of crucial importance to the investigation and (3) the
investigation concerns an offence that is punishable by law with imprisonment of at least six
years or another serious offence specified by the Act 810, or, for certain measures (telephone
tapping and obtaining information on which telephones or similar communication devices
within a specified area are connected to a particular telephone or other communication
device), a crime that has endangered or may endanger human life or important public
assets 811. In any event, such measures may not take place where, considering the purpose of
the measure, the significance of the case, and the intrusion and inconvenience that the


803
    Section 849(2) Administration of Justice Act.
804
    Section 850(1)-(2) Administration of Justice Act.
805
    Section 850(4) Administration of Justice Act. In addition, a seizure may be carried out, or a production order
may be issued, without a court order, if the person against whom the measure is directed consents to the measure
(Section 850(9) Administration of Justice Act).
806
    Section 850(4) Administration of Justice Act. Before the decision is taken by the court, the concerned person
has the opportunity to comment (Section 850(8) Administration of Justice Act).
807
    Section 851(1) and Section 856 Administration of Justice Act.
808
    Section 812(1) Administration of Justice Act. The police may make recordings or take copies of the
conversations, statements, items of mail, etc. mentioned in Article 812(1), to the extent that they are entitled to
examine the contents thereof, see Article 812(2) Administration of Justice Act. In addition to the interception of
communications, the police may order providers of telecommunication networks or services to preserve
electronic data, including traffic data, that is stored at the time the order is issued. Such a police order must set
out which data should be preserved and for how long. It may only cover data necessary for the investigation and
apply as short as possible, in any event not longer than 90 days (without the possibility to extend the order), see
Section 819 Administration of Justice Act.
809
    This requirement does not apply for the collection of ‘extended telecommunications data’, i.e., obtaining
information on which telephones or similar communication devices within a specified area are connected to
other telephones or communication devices, see Section 813(5) Administration of Justice Act.
810
    Section 813(1), lit. 3, (2) and (3) Administration of Justice Act. This for example includes offences against
the independence and safety of the State, offences against the Constitution and supreme authorities of the State
(including terrorism), the distribution of pornographic material of minors, blackmail, etc.
811
    Section 813(1) Administration of Justice Act.

                                                        108
measure may be presumed to cause the person or persons affected, the measure would be
disproportionate 812.

Similarly, the police may obtain information from telecommunication providers on the
location of a mobile telephone that is presumed to be used by a suspect (‘telecommunications
observation’). Such collection of location data may take place in the context of an
investigation concerning an offence punishable by a term of imprisonment of at least 1.5
years, if there are specific reasons to assume that the mobile phone is used by a suspect and
the measure is of major importance for the investigation 813. Telecommunications observation
may not be initiated if it would be disproportionate in light of the purpose of the interception
and the importance of the case, as well as the harm and inconvenience it would likely cause to
the concerned individual 814.

Specific procedural safeguards apply to the interception of communications, the collection of
information about communications and the collection of location data, which may in principle
only take place on the basis of a court order, which must set out the specific circumstances of
the case justifying that the abovementioned conditions are met, as well as the telephone
numbers, premises, addressees, or items of mail affected by the measure 815. The court order
must also specify the time period in which the measure may be conducted, which must be as
short as possible, not exceeding four weeks, unless extended by another court order 816.
Exceptionally, the police may collect (information on) communications without a court order,
where obtaining the order would defeat the purpose of the measure, in which case approval
from the court must be sough as soon as possible and no later than 24 hours after the measure
is implemented 817.

Moreover, when an application to a court is made by the police for the authorisation of
measures concerning communications (including the interception of communications and the
collection of location data), a lawyer must be appointed to represent the concerned individual,
who is entitled to access the materials provided by the police, attend hearings and provide
comments 818. In addition, the concerned individual must in principle be notified by the court
within 14 days after the measure has ended 819. Such notice may only be dispensed with or
deferred upon a decision of a court and after having provided the appointed lawyer with the
opportunity to comment, if it would prejudice an ongoing investigation or the protection of


812
    Section 814(1) Administration of Justice Act.
813
    Section 825(5) Administration of Justice Act.
814
    Section 825(7) Administration of Justice Act.
815
    Section 815(1) and 825(8) Administration of Justice Act. For the investigation of certain serious crimes (e.g.,
crimes against the independence of the state and security or against the state constitution and the highest state
authorities), the court order may also state the name of the person concerned by the measure (the suspect), see
Article 815(2) of the Act. In this case, the police must in principle notify the court as soon as possible after the
expiry of the period within which the measure was carried out of any telephone numbers intercepted that were
not listed in the court order. Such a notification must indicate the specific reasons for supposing that the
telephone numbers concerned are being used to pass messages to or from the suspect.
816
    Section 815(3) and 825(8) Administration of Justice Act.
817
    Section 815(4) and 825(8) Administration of Justice Act.
818
    Sections 816-817 and 825(8) Administration of Justice Act.
819
    Section 821(1) and (3) and 825(8) Administration of Justice Act. This notification requirement does not apply
when information is obtained on which telephones or similar communication devices within a specified area are
connected to a particular telephone or other communication device (Section 821(5) Administration of Justice
Act).

                                                       109
confidential information on the police’s investigative methods, or if other circumstances argue
against notification 820.

Fourth, on the basis of a court order, the police may read data in an information system that is
not publicly accessible with the aid of programs or other equipment (data reading) where (1)
there are specific grounds for supposing that the information system is being used by a
suspect in connection with certain serious crimes (i.e., crimes punishable with imprisonment
of at least six years or crimes against the independence of the State and security or against the
State constitution and the highest State authorities) and (2) the measure may be assumed to be
of crucial importance to the investigation 821. Data reading may not take place where,
considering purpose of the measure, the significance of the case, and the intrusion and
inconvenience that the measure may be presumed to cause the person or persons affected, the
measure would be disproportionate 822. The safeguards mentioned above for the collection of
communications (i.e., on exceptional collection without a court order, the appointment of a
lawyer and the notification of concerned individuals) also apply to data reading 823.

Finally, certain entities in the Faroe Islands are required to report information (including
personal data) to criminal law enforcement in accordance with rules on the prevention of
money laundering and the financing of terrorism. In particular, the Act on Measures to
prevent Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism (Money Laundering Act) 824 requires
certain entities (e.g., banks, fund brokers, payment service providers, investment management
companies, etc.) to investigate complex and unusually large transactions, as well as all
unusual patterns of transactions and activities that have no clear economic or demonstrable
lawful purpose, in order to determine whether there is suspicion or reasonable grounds to
presume that those transactions or activities are or have been connected to money laundering
or financing of terrorism 825. They must immediately notify the Public Prosecutor for Serious
Economic and International Crime when they suspect, or have reasonable grounds to
presume, that a transaction is or has been connected to money laundering or financing of
terrorism 826. Similarly, the Royal Decree on Specific Measures to combat Terrorism requires
entities covered by the Money Laundering Act to immediately notify the Danish Money
Laundering Secretariat of a transaction or request that has or has had a connection to persons
or entities mentioned on the lists of names used in connection with Denmark’s
implementation of the sanctions under United Nations Security Council Resolution No 1373
of 28 September 2001 827.

        2.2.2. Further use of the information collected




820
    Section 821(4) Administration of Justice Act.
821
    Section 826 (1) Administration of Justice Act.
822
    Section 826(2) Administration of Justice Act.
823
    Section 826(3)-(4) Administration of Justice Act.
824
    Act no. 651 of 8 June 2017 on Measures to prevent Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism (Money
Laundering Act) (set into force for the Faroese Islands by royal decree no. 813 of 12 August 2019).
825
    Section 25(1) Money Laundering Act.
826
    Section 26(1) Money Laundering Act.
827
    Royal decree for the Faroese Islands no. 1149 of 24 September 2020 on Specific Measures to combat
Terrorism.

                                                  110
The processing of personal data collected by law enforcement authorities in the Faroe Islands
is subject to the Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities 828.
As explained above, this Act essentially mirrors (with some minor adjustments to take the
Faroese context into account, e.g., by removing references to cooperation with/in the
European Data Protection Board) the Danish Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law
Enforcement Authorities 829, which has transposed the Law Enforcement Directive into the
Danish legal order. Therefore, the legal framework that applies in the Faroe Islands to the
processing of personal data by criminal law enforcement authorities is based on the
framework that applies in the EU. It provides for key data protection principles (e.g., purpose
limitation, data minimisation, data accuracy, data security, accountability) 830, imposes data
protection obligations on law enforcement authorities (e.g., prohibiting the processing of
sensitive data unless this is necessary for the protection of vital interests of individuals or the
data is manifestly made public by the individual; 831 to report data breaches 832, keep records of
processing activities 833, appoint a data protection officer 834 etc.) and imposes specific
conditions for transfers of personal data to third countries or international organisations (in
particular allowing transfers to countries/organisations for which the European Commission
has adopted an adequacy decision under the Law Enforcement Directive, or, in the absence
thereof, on the basis of an international agreement containing data protection safeguards or a
self-assessment of all the circumstances of the transfer carried out by the controller) 835.

In addition, more specific requirements on the use of information collected by criminal law
enforcement authorities follow from the Administration of Justice Act. For example, the Act
provides that any information incidentally obtained by the police in the context of a search or
the collection of (information on) communications may not be used as evidence in court,
unless a court decides otherwise if other investigative measures are unlikely to provide
evidence in the case and the case concerns an offence that is punishable by imprisonment for
at least 1.5 years (for information obtained through the collection of communications) or 6
years (for information obtained through a search) 836. Moreover, under the Administration of
Justice Act, any material obtained through the collection of (information on) communications
must be destroyed if it proves not to be relevant to the investigation 837.

        2.2.3. Oversight

The activities of Danish criminal law enforcement authorities in the Faroe Islands are
supervised by different bodies.

First, oversight of the processing of personal data by Danish criminal law enforcement
authorities in the Faroe Islands is carried out by the Danish data protection authority (Danish

828
                          Available                      in                   Danish            at:
https://www.kunngerdaportalur.fo/Umbraco/surface/Document/GetDocument?id=4278
829
    Act No. 410 of 27 April 2017.
830
    Section 4 Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
831
    Section 10 Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
832
    Section 13 Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities
833
    Section 10 Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
834
    Section 14 Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
835
    Section 34 Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
836
    Section 822 and 843 Administration of Justice Act.
837
    Section 824(4) Administration of Justice Act.

                                                    111
DPA), under the Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities 838.
The Danish DPA may investigate compliance with the Act, on the basis of complaints from
individuals or on its own initiative 839. It has access to all information relevant to its activities
and may conduct on-site inspections 840. In terms of remedial powers, the Danish DPA may
issue opinions that planned processing activities are likely to infringe the Act, may order
processing operations to comply with the Act, or may temporarily or definitely
restrict/prohibit the processing of personal data 841. Non-compliance with an order of the
Danish DPA is punishable by a criminal fine imposed by a court 842.

Second, the activities of the Danish criminal law enforcement authorities in the Faroe Islands
are subject to the general oversight of the Danish Ombudsman, the Danish Independent Police
Complaint Authority and the Danish Audit Office.

The Danish Parliamentary Ombudsman is elected by the Danish Parliament to investigate, at
its own initiative or acting on a complaint by an individual, whether public authorities act
unlawfully or otherwise commit errors or derelictions in the discharge of their duties 843. The
Ombudsman is independent from the Parliament 844 and may only be dismissed by the
Parliament if (s)he ceases to enjoy its confidence 845. The Ombudsman has jurisdiction over all
parts of the public administration, with the exception of courts 846. In conducting
investigations, the Ombudsman has access to all relevant information and can access all
relevant premises 847. The Ombudsman may express criticism, issue recommendations and
otherwise state his/her views of a case, but cannot take legally binding decisions 848. If the
Ombudsman’s investigation of a case reveals errors or derelictions of major importance, it
must be reported to the Parliament’s Legal Affairs Committee, as well as to the minister,
municipal council or regional council concerned.

The Independent Police Complaints Authority is an independent body with the power to
investigate, on the basis of complaints or on its own initiative, allegations of police
misconduct (including in the Faroe Islands) 849. In conducting an investigation of possible
misconduct, the Authority has access to all relevant information 850. Unless an investigation is


838
    Under the previous law, the Danish DPA for instance carried out oversight activities of the police in
November 2021, focusing on inter alia data security, the deletion of personal data and rights of individuals.
839
    Section 40(1), (6), (10) and (12) Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
840
    Section 41(1) Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
841
    Section 42(1) Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
842
    Section 50(2) Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
843
    See Chapters 1, 4, 5 and 7 of the Danish Ombudsman Act.
844
    Section 10 Danish Ombudsman Act.
845
    Section 3 Danish Ombudsman Act.
846
    Chapter 2 Danish Ombudsman Act.
847
    Chapter 6 Danish Ombudsman Act.
848
    Section 22 Danish Ombudsman Act.
849
    Chapter 107 and 108 Administration of Justice Act. The Authority is headed by a Police Complaints Council,
whose members are appointed by the Minister of Justice for a four year renewable term, upon the
recommendation of different bodies: a Chair that must be a High Court judge (upon the recommendation of the
High Courts), an attorney (upon the recommendation of the Danish Bar and Law Council), a professor in law
and two representatives of the general public (upon the recommendation of the National Association of Local
Authorities and the Danish People’s Information Council), see Section 118b Danish Administration of Justice
Act. In accordance with Section 150(2) Administration of Justice Act, the Authority exercises its functions with
complete independence.
850
    Section 1060(1) Administration of Justice Act.

                                                     112
terminated 851, the Authority issues a decision within a reasonable time, in which it may
include comments on the conduct of the police 852. The Authority may also initiate an
investigation into allegations of criminal offences committed by the police, either upon a
complaint from an individual or ex officio, when there is a reasonable suspicion that police
personnel in service have committed a criminal offense which is subject to prosecution by the
public authorities 853. In this context, the Authority has access to all relevant information and
may use the investigatory powers, including the coercive powers, which are available to the
police, 854. When an investigation is completed, the Authority sends the case to the public
prosecutor for a decision on possible prosecution 855. In addition, the Authority shares an
annual report on its investigation with the Danish Attorney General 856. According to the 2022
annual report of the Authority, it handled 17 cases concerning the Faroe Islands in 2022,
including two criminal cases concerning the unlawful disclosure of information 857.

The Danish Audit Office is an independent body headed by an Auditor General, who is
appointed by the Speaker of the Danish Parliament and approved by the Parliament’s
Standing Orders Committee 858. While the main role of the Audit Office is to conduct financial
audits, it may also examine whether government-funded agencies and enterprises comply with
applicable laws and regulations and on the efficiency and effectiveness of the administration.
For example, in 2020, the Audit Office published a report on the outsourcing of sensitive and
confidential personal data by central government IT systems 859.

         2.2.4. Redress

Individuals whose personal data is collected by criminal law enforcement authorities in the
Faroe Islands have access to different avenues to obtain redress, including compensation for
damages.

First, individuals have a right to obtain access to, correction 860 of and deletion 861 of their data
processed by criminal law enforcement authorities under the Act on the Processing of



851
    The investigation can e.g., be terminated if there are grounds for bringing charges against the accused or the
defendant is suspected of a criminal offense and demands the case be treated as a criminal case. See Section
1069(1) Administration of Justice Act.
852
    Section 1070-1071(1) Administration of Justice Act. If no decision has been made within 6 months, the
complainants and defendants must be notified.
853
    Section 1077(1) Administration of Justice Act.
854
    Section 1079 Administration of Justice Act.
855
    Section 1081(1) Administration of Justice Ace. The Authority may appeal decisions of the public prosecutor’s
office on possible prosecution to the Prosecutor General.
856
    Section 1081(2) Administration of Justice Act.
857
      Available at: https://politiklagemyndigheden.dk/wp-content/uploads/2023/05/Politiklagemyndigheden-
Aarsberetning-2022.pdf.
858
    Section 1(1) Danish Auditor General Act. The Auditor General is appointed for a term of six years, with a
possible renewal of four years. He/she may only be dismissed by the Speaker of the Parliament upon
recommendation of the Public Accounts Committee, with the approval of the Standing Orders Committee of the
Parliament.
859
    Available at: https://uk.rigsrevisionen.dk/media/2105518/15-2019.pdf.
860
    Pursuant to Section 17(1) Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities, a criminal
law enforcement authority is required, upon request from an individual, to rectify without undue delay any
incorrect information and to complement any incomplete information (where the latter is possible without
jeopardising the purpose of the processing). The authority is also required to inform other entities from whom
the data originated of any corrections.

                                                      113
Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities 862. The exercise of the right of access may be
postponed, restricted or refused if providing access would be prejudicial to (1) official or legal
inquiries, investigations or procedures, (2) the prevention, detection, investigation or
prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, (3) the protection of
national security, (4) the protection of public security or (5) the protection of the rights of the
data subject or others 863. In response to a request for erasure, the authority may instead restrict
the processing of personal data where the accuracy of the data is contested by the data subject
and the accuracy/inaccuracy cannot be ascertained, or the data must be maintained for the
purposes of evidence 864. In case of a postponement/restriction/refusal, a law enforcement
authority has to inform the individual of the reasons thereof or indicate to the individual that it
is not possible to disclose whether or not personal data regarding him/her are being
processed 865. In both cases, the individual has to be informed about the possibility to appeal
the decision, or to request that the Danish DPA exercises the rights on behalf of the individual
(the outcome of which can in turn be appealed before a court) 866.

Second, any individual may lodge a complaint concerning the processing of their data by a
criminal law enforcement authority with the Danish DPA 867. In response to a complaint, the
latter may make use of all of the investigatory and remedial powers described in the previous
section. Decisions or inaction of the Danish DPA can be appealed before the Danish courts 868.
The court may annul administrative decisions and return the decision to the specific authority
(cassation) or replace an administrative decision with a new decision 869.

Third, any individual can lodge a complaint about the actions of Danish criminal law
enforcement authorities in the Faroe Islands, including the collection and use of personal data,
before the Danish Parliamentary Ombudsman, who can make use of the powers described in
the previous section. Similarly, individuals can turn to the Independent Police Complaints
Authority, which can make use of the powers described in the previous section to investigate
and handle complaints or allegations of criminal offences concerning activities of Danish
criminal law enforcement authorities 870.

Fourth, individuals can also directly invoke the Act on the Processing of Personal Data by
Law Enforcement Authorities against criminal law enforcement authorities in court to obtain
judicial redress 871. This also includes the possibility to obtain compensation for material or


861
    In case of an erasure of data in response to a request from an individual, the authority must inform any
recipients of the data thereof (Section 17(6) Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement
Authorities).
862
    Section 15 and 17 Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
863
    Section 16(1), in conjunction with Section 14(1) Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement
Authorities
864
    Section 17(3) Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
865
    Section 16(3) and Section 17(6) Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
866
    Section 40(1)(10) Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
867
    Section 48(1) Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
868
    Section 48(2) Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities and Section 63(1) of
the Danish Constitution.
869
    See Article 63(1) of the Danish Constitution.
870
    In accordance with Section 1058(3) Administration of Justice Act, a complaint must be lodged within 6
months of the occurrence of the matter to which the complaint relates, although this time limit may be
disregarded by the Authority in exceptional cases.
871
    Section 48(3) Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.

                                                    114
immaterial damage suffered as a result of unlawful data processing by a criminal law
enforcement authority 872.

Fifth, different judicial redress avenues are available to individuals to challenge the unlawful
use of investigative measures (e.g., search, seizure, intervention with the secrecy of
communications, etc.). In particular, disputes on the lawful use of investigatory powers may
be brought before the court during an investigation, in which case an individual can invoke
Section 72 of the Danish Constitution873. Furthermore, depending on the circumstances,
unlawfully obtained evidence may be ruled inadmissible by the court in the criminal case 874.
In addition, any individual who, in the course of criminal proceedings, has been subjected to
investigative measures may obtain compensation for financial damage, mental suffering,
inconvenience, disturbance or deterioration of position or condition as a result of these
measures 875. The Prosecution Service decides whether to award a claim for damages 876. If the
claim for damages is refused, the claimant can, within two months of notification of the
refusal, request that the claim is brought before the district court 877.

Finally, any individual may obtain judicial redress before the European Court of Human
Rights against the unlawful collection of his/her data by Danish criminal law enforcement
authorities in the Faroe Islands, provided that all available domestic remedies have been
exhausted.

      2.3. Access and use by public authorities for national security purposes

Personal data transferred from the EU to the Faroe Islands based on the adequacy decision
may be accessed for national security purposes by the Danish Security and Intelligence
Service (DSIS) on the basis of legislation put into force in the Faroe Islands and Faroese
implementing rules 878. The DSIS, which is part of the police, is primarily tasked with
preventing, investigating and combating crimes against the independence and security of the
State, as well as crimes against the constitution and supreme State authorities 879. In addition,
the DSIS performs several other tasks in the area of national security, such as informing the
Minister of Justice of matters relating to internal security, collecting intelligence on threats to
the country, and drawing up threat assessments 880. As described in more detail below, the


872
    Section 49 Act on the Processing of Personal Data by Law Enforcement Authorities.
873
    Section 763(1) Administration of Justice Act.
874
    Section 763(1) Administration of Justice Act.
875
    Section 1050, conjunction with Section 1049 Administration of Justice Act.
876
    Section 1053 (1) Administration of Justice Act.
877
    Section 1054 Administration of Justice Act. For instance, in one case, the Danish Eastern High Court ruled in
favour of DKK 75 000 (approx. EUR 10 000) in compensation due to four police raids of a company and long-
term and extensive seizure of business documents (U.2005.103Ø or TfK2004.685/1Ø).
878
    This report focuses on the legal framework that applies in the Faroe Islands. It therefore does not describe the
collection and use of personal data by the Danish Defence Intelligence Service (DDIS), which is regulated
exclusively by Danish law (that has not been put into force on the Faroe Islands). The DDIS, which falls under
the Danish Ministry of Defence, is Denmark’s foreign affairs intelligence service and military intelligence
service. The DDSIS’ interception of communications may not target authorities, companies, organisations or
individuals within the Danish territory, including the Faroe Islands (Section 13 of the Danish Defence Act).
Moreover, according to written information received from the Faroese government, there is currently no legal
basis that would allow controllers and processors in the Faroe Islands to voluntarily disclose information in case
it would be requested by the DDSIS.
879
    Article 1(1) ASIS. See also Chapters 12 and 13 of the Criminal Code.
880
    Article 1(2)-(7) ASIS.

                                                       115
collection of personal data by the DSIS in the Faroe Islands, as well as the further use of such
data, is regulated by the ASIS, the Faroese Administration of Justice Act and Faroese
Executive Orders.

        2.3.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

The ASIS lays down the different powers of the DSIS (described in more detail below), as
well as the overarching conditions and limitations that apply to the use of each power.
Importantly, while the ASIS provides the DSIS with a legal basis to collect information
(including personal data), the DSIS can only make use of coercive measures – such as
carrying out a search/seizure, issuing a production order, or intercepting communications – in
accordance with the conditions, limitations and safeguards of the Administration of Justice
Act described in section 2.2.1 881. As a result, the same requirements as the ones that apply to
criminal law enforcement activities of the Police, also apply to the national security activities
of the DSIS. For example, the information must be important in the context of a specific
criminal investigation, the DSIS must comply with the principle of proportionality, prior
judicial authorisation must in principle be obtained, and individuals must in principle be
notified about the collection of their data (e.g., within 14 days after the interception of
communications), etc.

More generally, the DSIS is, as any other public authority, subject to principles of general
administrative law, including the principle of proportionality. This means, inter alia, that the
means and methods used by the DSIS to collect or obtain personal data must be appropriate
for that purpose, that less intrusive means and methods must be deemed not to be sufficient,
and that the method chosen must not be disproportionate to the purpose for which the data are
collected or obtained 882.

In accordance with the ASIS, the DSIS provides that it may open “inquiries” into natural and
legal persons, if the inquiry is likely to be relevant for the performance of its tasks relating to
the prevention and investigation of crimes against the independence and security of the State
or against the constitution, or if the inquiry is necessary for the performance of its other
tasks 883. An inquiry is an activity aimed at specifically selected natural or legal persons for the
purpose of collecting or obtaining information about them. The actual collection of personal
data in the context of an inquiry may only take place if additional conditions are met.

First, the Act provides that the DSIS may collect and obtain data that may be relevant to its
activities 884. Based on the preparatory work for the Danish DSIS Act (on which the Faroese
Act is based), the “collection” of personal data means accessing data that is readily available
(e.g., information available on the internet), while “obtaining” personal data means accessing
data that is not readily available but can be obtained by contacting a third party such as a
public authority, association, organisation or private person 885. According to an evaluation


881
    Section 6 ASIS.
882
    Danish Ministry of Justice, Report on the experience with the PET Law, June 2022 (PET report), p. 16. The
report is available in Danish at https://www.justitsministeriet.dk/pressemeddelelse/justitsministeriet-
offentliggoer-rapport-om-evaluering-af-pet-loven/.
883
    Section 5 ASIS.
884
    Section 3 ASIS.
885
    PET report, p. 12.

                                                    116
report of the Danish Ministry of Justice on the activities of the DSIS, the criterion “may be
relevant” implies that data may only be collected or obtained by the DSIS if the data is likely
to have an impact on the effectiveness of the Service 886. In any event, a third party receiving a
request is not obliged under the ASIS to disclose personal data to the DSIS 887. Whether the
requested data can be disclosed must therefore be determined based on the legal grounds for
processing set out in the applicable data protection legislation, in this case the Faroese Data
Protection Act. The only way for the DSIS to compel the third party to disclose data is by
following the procedures of the Administration of Justice Act (e.g., to obtain a production
order) 888.

Second, the DSIS may obtain data from other public authorities (including in the Faroe
Islands) 889, which are obliged to disclose the data if the DSIS considers that the data are likely
to be relevant to the performance of its tasks relating to the prevention and investigation of
crimes against the independence and security of the State, as well as crimes against the
constitution. The criterion “likely to be relevant” implies that there must be a more specific
presumption that the data which the Service wishes to obtain will have an impact on the
performance of the Service’s tasks 890. In other words, there must be a certain probability (and
not a remote possibility) that the data may contribute to the Service’s performance of those
tasks 891.

Additional limitations and safeguards follow from the EOFIDSIS, which for instance requires
that the collection of particularly sensitive health data (e.g., information on psychiatric
diagnoses) and data on groups of persons who are not identified in advance may only take
place with the prior approval of the head or general counsel of the DSIS 892. When obtaining
data on groups of unidentified persons, the DSIS is required, as soon as circumstances permit,
to assess whether the persons to whom the data relates are relevant for its tasks. To the extent
this is deemed not to be the case, the irrelevant data must be deleted immediately 893. In
addition, the use of coercive investigative measures must always be approved by the head or
general counsel of the DSIS or their deputies 894. If the measure in question requires a court




886
    PET report, p. 12.
887
      See the proposal for legislative act LSF 161 in parliamentary session 2012/1, p. 88:
https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/ft/201212L00161 (Only available in Danish).
888
    Section 848(1) Administration of Justice Act. See the proposal for legislative act L 23 in parliamentary
session 2015-16, p. 8: https://www.ft.dk/ripdf/samling/20151/lovforslag/l23/20151_l23_som_fremsat.pdf (Only
in available in Danish).
889
    Section 4 ASIS. Based on this provision, the DSIS can only request data that is already available to the other
authority or that it should receive in the future. It does not oblige the other authority to obtain information from a
third party that it otherwise would not have had a reason to obtain. See proposal to legislative act L 23 in
parliamentary                       session                      2015-16,                      p.                   9:
https://www.ft.dk/ripdf/samling/20151/lovforslag/l23/20151_l23_som_fremsat.pdf (Only in available in Danish).
890
    Under Section 4 ASIS, the DSIS may obtain information on persons at a stage where there is no basis (yet)
for a concrete suspicion, including grounds for initiating a criminal investigation or bringing criminal charges,
but where there may nevertheless be reasons for presuming a suspicion, for example because the concerned
individual is associated with a group of persons or an organisation that is under investigation by the DSIS. See
PET report, p. 12.
891
    PET report, p. 12.
892
    Section 10(2) EOFIDSIS.
893
    Section 10(1) EOFIDSIS.
894
    Article 9(1) EOFIDSIS.

                                                        117
order, the approval must be given before the case is referred to the court in accordance with
the rules of the Administration of Justice Act 895.

As stressed above, the provisions of the ASIS on the possibility for the DSIS to open inquiries
and in that context collect information do not by themselves authorise the DSIS to initiate
criminal investigations or to make use of coercive powers such as searches, seizures,
production and the interception of communications (or collection of information on
communications). The latter may only be carried out if all relevant legal requirements are
fulfilled, i.e., under (1) the ASIS (e.g., establishing the relevance or necessity of the collection
for the performance of the DSIS’ tasks), (2) the EOFIDSIS (e.g., as regards internal approval)
and (3) the Administration of Justice Act (e.g., relevance/importance to a specific criminal
investigation, compliance with the principle of proportionality, need to obtain prior
authorisation from a court, obligation to notify concerned individuals, etc.).

        2.3.2. Further use of the information collected

The processing of personal data collected by the DSIS is also governed by the ASIS, which
imposes the principle of purpose limitation, data minimisation, data accuracy and limited data
retention 896. With respect to data retention, the ASIS generally requires the DSIS to delete
data on natural persons where no new information has been obtained in connection with the
inquiry or investigation in the last 15 years 897. Data may only be kept longer where the data is
needed on imperative grounds relating to the performance of the DSIS’ tasks, in which case
the DSIS must inform the Intelligence Oversight Board (see below) thereof 898. However, if
the DSIS becomes aware that there is no longer a legal basis to keep data before the
abovementioned retention period has expired (i.e., because the data is no longer relevant to
the performance of its tasks relating to the investigation of certain crimes or the data is no
longer necessary for the performance of the DSIS’ other tasks), that data must be deleted
immediately 899. This obligation does not apply where the information is included in
documents for which there is still a legal basis for the processing 900. The DSIS must carry out
regular spot checks on the deletion of data, on which it is required to regularly report to the
Intelligence Oversight Board 901.

The DSIS is also required to have technical and organisational measures in place to ensure the
security of the data it processes, in accordance with the DSIS Order on security measures 902.
This includes having internal rules on inter alia physical security measures, access control and
authorisation schemes, guidance on the use of computer equipment, etc., which must be
reviewed at least annually 903. More generally, the EOFIDSIS requires the DSIS to regularly

895
    Article 9(2) EOFIDSIS. In particular, as regards the initiation of telephone interception or the obtaining of
telecommunications data based on court orders relating to a named person rather than a specific telephone
number, in accordance with Article 815(2) Administration of Justice Act, prior approval must be given by the
head or general counsel of the DSIS or their deputies in each case where measures are taken in respect of new
telephone numbers, see Article 9(3) EOFIDSIS.
896
    Section 6 ASIS.
897
    Section 9(1) ASIS.
898
    Section 9(2) ASIS, in conjunction with Section 14 EOFIDSIS.
899
    Section 9a (1) ASIS.
900
    Section 9a (2) ASIS.
901
    Section 12 and 18 EOFIDSIS.
902
    Section 3 DSIS Order on security measures.
903
    Section 4 DSIS Order on security measures.

                                                      118
carry out spot checks on deletion, logging, opening of investigations, obtaining of data,
investigative measures and transfer of data 904 and report on such checks to the Intelligence
Oversight Board 905.

Under the ASIS, the further sharing of personal data with other entities is subject to specific
requirements. First, the DSIS may share data with the Danish Defence Intelligence Service if
such sharing may be relevant to the performance of the tasks of both services 906. The
disclosure of information to other entities (within or outside the Faroe Islands) may take place
only (1) in compliance with all data protection principles (e.g., purpose limitation, data
minimisation, data accuracy); (2) if the individual has given consent, the disclosure is likely to
be relevant to the performance of the DSIS’ tasks relating to the prevention and investigation
of crimes against the independence and security of the State or against the constitution, or the
disclosure is necessary for the performance of its other tasks and (3) when the disclosure is
presumed reasonable following a case-by-case assessment (which, according to the
preparatory work on the ASIS, requires to examine in particular, the content of the
information, the purpose of the disclosure and an assessment of the damaging effect that such
disclosure could cause for the concerned individual) 907. An additional requirement applies to
sensitive personal data, which may only be transferred to foreign authorities with the prior
approval of the head or general counsel of the DSIS or their deputies 908.

Finally, when making use of the powers under the Administration of Justice Act, the same
limitations under that Act as the ones described in Section 2.2.2, e.g., as regards the use of
intercepted communications as evidence or the deletion thereof when the information is not
relevant for the investigation, also apply to data processed by the DSIS.

         2.3.3. Oversight

The activities of the DSIS are supervised by different bodies.

First, compliance by the DSIS with the ASIS, including its requirements on the processing of
personal data, is overseen by the independent Danish Intelligence Oversight Board 909. The
Board can investigate compliance with the ASIS (and the rules established under the ASIS,


904
    Section 12 EOFIDSIS.
905
    Section 18 EOFIDSIS.
906
    Section 10(1) ASIS.
907
      Section 10(2) and (4), in conjunction with Section 6a and 7 ASIS. See also
https://www.logting.fo/mal/mal/?id=194.
908
    Section 11 EOFIDSIS.
909
    The status and independence of the Board are laid down the Danish Act on the Security and Intelligence
Service (DASIS). The Board is composed of five members, appointed by the Minister of Justice after
consultation of Parliamentary Committee on the Intelligence Services (see below) for a renewable period of four
years (Section 16(1) DASIS). The chair of the Board, a judge of the High Court, is appointed on the basis of a
recommendation from the presidents of the High Courts of Eastern and Western Denmark (Section 16(2)
DASIS). It follows from the preparatory work pertaining to Section 16 that it should not be possible to appoint
members who have or have held prominent positions in a political party, who are staff in the central
administration, or who served in intelligence agencies (See proposal for legislative act L 161 of parliamentary
session 2012-13, p. 73-74: 20121_l161_som_fremsat.pdf(ft.dk) (Only available in Danish). In particular, there
may be no circumstances casting doubt on the complete impartiality of the persons concerned. A Board member
may only be dismissed by the Minister of Justice if the person in question requests so or if the prerequisites for
the appointment are no longer met (Section 16(3) DASIS). In accordance with Section 17 DASIS, the Board
exercises its functions with complete independence.

                                                      119
such as the EOFIDSIS) 910 on its own initiative or on the basis of a complaint from an
individual 911. For example, in 2021, the Board inter alia carried out checks of compliance by
the DSIS with the requirements for obtaining information from other public authorities, the
data retention requirements, the rules for data sharing with third parties, as well as data
security 912. In carrying out its oversight activities, the Board can access all relevant
information (including by ordering the DSIS to provide any information or material relevant
to its activities, to access the premises of as well as the data processed by the DSIS) 913. In
addition, the DSIS is required to regularly report to the Board, e.g., about the collection of
personal data from public authorities and about its regular internal audits concerning data
deletion, logging, the opening of investigations, obtaining of data, the use of investigative
measures and transfers of data 914. The Board may issue an opinion with recommendations to
the DSIS, which may also be provided to the Minister of Justice 915. If, in exceptional cases,
the DSIS does not comply with a recommendation of the Board, it must notify the Board and
immediately submit the matter to the relevant minister for decision 916. If also the minister
decides not to follow the recommendation of the Board, the Government must notify the
Parliamentary Committee for the Intelligence Services 917.

Second, the DSIS is more generally subject to independent oversight by the Danish
Parliamentary Ombudsman, who can make use of all the powers described in section 2.2.3.

Third, the DSIS, as a part of the Danish police, is also subject to the oversight of the
Independent Police Complaints Authority, which can make use of all the powers described in
section 2.2.3.

Fourth, the Danish National Audit Office also has the power to supervise the activities of the
DSIS, under the same conditions as described in section 2.2.3.

Finally, the DSIS is subject to specific parliamentary oversight by the Danish Parliamentary
Committee for the Intelligence Services 918. To this end, the Government must provide the
Committee with an annual update on the activities of the intelligence services, including the
DSIS, and keep it informed of significant circumstances of a security nature and foreign
policy issues relevant to the activities of the intelligence services 919. The Committee may also


910
    The Board does not supervise compliance with the Administration of Justice Act, which is subject to the
supervision of courts and other oversight bodies that are competent for criminal law enforcement authorities, see
below (see Section 18 ASIS).
911
    Section 18 ASIS.
912
     See the Board’s annual report on the DSIS for 2021, available at: https://www.tet.dk/wp-
content/uploads/2022/06/PET_UK_2021_web.pdf.
913
    Section 20 ASIS.
914
    Section 15 EOFIDSIS and Section 18, in conjunction with Section 12 EOFIDSIS.
915
    Section 19(1) ASIS.
916
    Section 19(3) ASIS.
917
    Section 19(1) ASIS. See also Section 3(3) of Act no. 378 of 6 July 1988 on the establishment of a committee
on the Danish Defence Intelligence Service and the Danish Security and Intelligence Service as amended by Act
no. 632 of 12 June 2013 (Intelligence Services Committee Act).
918
    The Committee consists of five Members of Parliament appointed by the political parties represented in the
Danish Parliament. It is headed by a chairperson elected by the Committee members, see Section 1(2)
Intelligence Services Committee Act.
919
    Section 2 Intelligence Services Committee Act. In addition, the government is required to submit the annual
report of the DSIS to the Committee prior to its publishing, see Section 2(6) Intelligence Services Committee
Act.

                                                      120
request information from the government on the activities of the intelligence services,
including statistical information 920. Finally, prior to issuing guidelines on the activities of the
intelligence services, the government must inform the Committee of their content 921. The
Committee may, either orally or in writing, provide the government with its opinion on all the
matters under its consideration 922. However, since the members of the Committee are bound
by a duty of confidentiality, the recommendations of the Committee are not made public 923.

        2.3.4. Redress

Individuals can make use of different avenues to obtain redress against the DSIS, including
compensation for damages.

First, individuals may request the Intelligence Oversight Board to investigate whether the
Service is processing personal data about them “without justification” 924. Following such a
request, the Board must ensure that this is not the case and inform the person concerned
thereof 925. In particular, the Board will, on the basis of a request from an individual, verify
whether the DSIS complies with the ASIS, including for instance with the applicable data
protection principles (e.g., purpose limitation, data accuracy, data minimisation). If during its
investigation the Board finds that the Service is processing personal data without a legal basis
(or no longer has a legal basis for the processing), the DSIS is obliged to delete that data
under the ASIS 926. In addition, in case “special circumstances so warrant”, the Board may
also order the Service to provide the data subject full or partial access to personal data about
him/her processed by the Service 927. For example, in 2021, the Board received 35 requests
from individuals, which led to a finding that data was processed unlawfully in six cases, after
which the data was deleted by the DSIS 928. Decisions of the Board in response to a request
from an individual can be challenged before the Danish courts in accordance with Section
63(1) of the Constitution to obtain judicial review, as described in section 2.2.4.

In addition, while under the ASIS individuals are in principle not entitled to have direct access
to data processed by the DSIS or to know whether the DSIS is processing such data, the DSIS
may provide full or partial access to data upon request “if special circumstances so warrant”,
i.e., where the individual has a vital interest in having access to the data, e.g., if it could have
serious psychological harmful effects if the person is not informed that he or she is not
registered with the Service, or in cases where unlawful processing of personal data has caused
a person significant financial or non-financial damage 929.

920
    Section 2(3) Intelligence Services Committee Act. The Committee may furthermore ask the Minister for
Justice and the Minister for Defence to arrange for the heads of the intelligence services to be present at a
committee meeting to answer questions, see Section 2(4) Intelligence Services Committee Act.
921
    Section 2(5) Intelligence Services Committee Act.
922
    Section 4(1) Intelligence Services Committee Act. Based on Section 4(2) Intelligence Services Committee
Act, it may furthermore report to the Danish Parliament on its activities, including on the matters under
consideration by the Committee. The report may be made public.
923
    Section 6e Intelligence Services Committee Act.
924
    Section 12(2) and 13(2) and (3) ASIS.
925
    Section 13(1) ASIS.
926
    Section 13(2) ASIS.
927
    Section 13(3) ASIS.
928
    See the Board’s annual report on the DSIS for 2021, p. 28.
929
     See proposal for legislative act LFS 161 of parliamentary session 2012/1, p 108-109: available at:
https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/ft/201212L00161.

                                                    121
Second, any individual can lodge a complaint about the actions of Danish national security
authorities in the Faroe Islands, including the collection and use of personal data, before the
Danish Parliamentary Ombudsman, who can make use of the powers described in the
previous section.

Third, individuals can turn to the Independent Police Complaints Authority, which can make
use of the powers described in the previous section to investigate and handle complaints
concerning activities of Danish national security authorities 930.

Fourth, the same judicial avenues as the ones described in section 2.2.4 (e.g., invoking
Section 72 of the Danish Constitution, claiming compensation for damages suffered because
of the unlawful use of investigative measures under the Administration of Justice Act) are
also available against the DSIS.

Finally, any individual may obtain judicial redress before the European Court of Human
Rights against the unlawful collection of his/her data by the DSIS, provided that all available
domestic remedies have been exhausted.




930
    In accordance with Section 1058(3) Administration of Justice Act, a complaint must be lodged within 6
months of the occurrence of the matter to which the complaint relates, although this time limit may be
disregarded by the Authority in exceptional cases.

                                                  122
                                    V. BAILIWICK OF GUERNSEY

1. RULES APPLYING TO THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA

      1.1. Relevant developments in the data protection framework of Guernsey

On 21 November 2003 the European Commission adopted a decision in which the Bailiwick
of Guernsey was considered as providing an adequate level of protection for personal data 931.
The Article 29 Working Party had adopted a positive opinion on the level of protection of
personal data in Guernsey on 13 June 2003 932. At the time, the legal framework for the
protection of personal data was set out in the Data Protection (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law
2001 (Data Protection Law 2001), which was closely aligned with the UK’s Data Protection
Act 1998. The latter had been enacted to give effect to the provisions of Directive 95/46/EC
(Data Protection Directive) 933.

Since the adoption of the Commission’s adequacy decision, Guernsey has significantly
modernised its data protection framework, in particular by adopting the Data Protection
(Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law 2017 (Data Protection Law). The Data Protection Law was
intended to bring the Guernsey regime in line with Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR) 934. It
applies in full since 26 May 2019 935.

The Data Protection Law is complemented by several Ordinances and Regulations. The most
important one is the Data Protection (Law Enforcement and Related Matters) (Bailiwick of
Guernsey) Ordinance, 2018 (LEO), which regulates the processing of personal data by
competent authorities for criminal law enforcement and national security purposes 936.


931
    Commission Decision 2003/821/EC of 21 November 2003 on the adequate protection of personal data in
Guernsey, OJ L 308, 25.11.2003, p. 27-28.
932
     Opinion 5/2003 on the level of protection of personal data in Guernsey (WP79), available at:
https://ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2003/wp79_en.pdf
933
    Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data.
934
    Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).
935
    While the Data Protection Law came into force on 25 May 2018, a one-year transition period was foreseen for
certain obligations.
936
    In addition, the Data Protection (Commencement, Amendment and Transitional) (Bailiwick of Guernsey)
Ordinance, 2018 (CAT Ordinance) introduced several modifications to the Data Protection Law and other
ordinances. The Data Protection (Authorised Jurisdiction) (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Ordinance, 2019 was adopted
to ensure the free flow of data between Guernsey and the UK during the Brexit transition period. Two further
statutory instruments entered into force on 25 May 2018. First, the Data Protection (International Cooperation
and Assistance) (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Regulations, 2018 provides the Data Protection Authority with
additional functions in relation to international cooperation and mutual assistance. Second, the Data Protection
(General Provisions) (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Regulations, 2018 regulates administrative matters such as the
registration of controllers/processors, registration fees, payment of levies and contains certain rules regarding the
transfer of personal data. The General Provision Regulation 2018 also introduces certain exemptions and amends
existing exemptions under the Data Protection Law. The General Provisions Regulation 2018 has been amended
five times after it was adopted: by the Data Protection (General Provisions) (Bailiwick of Guernsey)
(Amendment) Regulations, 2019, the Data Protection (General Provisions) (Bailiwick of Guernsey)
(Amendment No. 2) Regulations, 2019; the Data Protection (General Provisions) (Bailiwick of Guernsey)
(Amendment) Regulations, 2020; the Data Protection (General Provisions) (Bailiwick of Guernsey)
(Amendment No. 2) Regulations, 2019; and the Data Protection (General Provisions) (Bailiwick of Guernsey)
(Amendment No. 3) Regulations, 2020.


                                                        123
With the adoption and full entry into force of the Data Protection Law and the
abovementioned Ordinances and Regulations, the Guernsey data protection regime has been
significantly strengthened. As set out in more detail below, the Data Protection Law mirrors
the provisions of the GPDR with respect to all of its key aspects. In particular, in areas where
the GDPR has enhanced the protection of personal data when compared to the protection
offered by its predecessor, the Data Protection Directive, the Data Protection Law of
Guernsey has been strengthened as well.

Like the Data Protection Law 2001, the new Data Protection Law has a broad scope of
application, applying to both private operators and public authorities 937. While the definitions
of ‘personal data’, ‘controller’, ‘processor’, ‘data subject’ and ‘processing’ 938 (which are
identical to those used in the GDPR) have not changed, the Data Protection Law has brought
even more convergence with the GDPR, e.g., by introducing a definition of
‘pseudonymisation’ 939 and further clarifying when a person is “identifiable” by applying the
same criteria of recital 26 of the GDPR 940. Also the territorial scope of the Law has been
extended to cover the processing of personal data by controllers or processors not established
in Guernsey, subject to the same conditions that are set out in Article 3 of the GDPR 941. This
confirms the intention of the Guernsey legislator to strengthen the effectiveness of Guernsey’s
data protection regime.

The main data protection principles (i.e., the principles of lawfulness, fairness, transparency,
purpose limitation, data minimisation, accuracy, storage limitation, integrity and
confidentiality) were already present in the Data Protection Law 2001 and are present also in
the modernised Law 942. Some of them have been further strengthened, e.g., the principle of
lawfulness of processing, the transparency obligations, the security principle and the principle
of accountability.

In particular, as regards the principle of lawfulness, the requirements for valid consent have
been reinforced, by making clear that, in addition to being freely given, specific and informed,
consent must be unambiguous and expressed by a clear affirmative action 943. Similarly, the
Data Protection Law has strengthened the existing transparency obligations by requiring that
additional information is provided to the individual (e.g., the contact details of the data
protection officer, the fact that the controller intends to transfer the data to a third country, the
retention period, the right to withdraw consent, the existence of automated decision-making,

937
    The Guernsey data protection regime applies to the processing of personal data wholly or partly by automated
means, or to processing other than by automated means, if the personal data forms or is intended to form part of
a filing system, see Section 2(2) Data Protection Law. ‘Processing’ is defined in Section 111 (1) Data Protection
Law as “any operation or set of operations which is performed on personal data or on sets of personal data,
whether or not by automated means.” This includes collection, recording, organisation, structuring or storage,
adaptation or alteration, retrieval, consultation or use, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwise
making available, alignment or combination, or restriction, and erasure or destruction of personal data.
938
    Section 111(1) Data Protection Law. ‘Personal data’ is defined as “any information relating to an identified or
identifiable individual”. In the context of the Law ‘individual’ means a living natural person. A ‘controller’ is a
person, which, alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of the processing of personal
data. A ‘processor’ processes personal data on behalf of a controller.
939
    Section 111(1) Data Protection Law.
940
    Paragraph 1 of Schedule 9 to the Data Protection Law.
941
    Sections 2(3) and 3(b) Data Protection Law.
942
    Section 6 Data Protection Law.
943
    Section 10 Data Protection Law.

                                                       124
etc.) when data is collected directly from the individual 944 or from third parties 945 and when it
is further processed 946.

With respect to the principle of data security, the Data Protection Law has introduced the
obligation to notify data breaches 947, which was previously not present in the Guernsey
regime. As also required by the GDPR, in case of a personal data breach, the controller must,
as soon as practicable, and in any event, within 72 hours after becoming aware of the breach
(unless the latter is not practicable), notify the personal data breach in writing to the
Authority. If a personal data breach is likely to pose a high risk to the significant interests of a
data subject, written notice must be provided also to the data subject.

In terms of accountability, the obligations have been fully aligned with the GDPR and
requirements that were not present in the Data Protection Law 2001 have been introduced:
The Data Protection Law contains the obligations to implement principles of data protection
by design and by default 948, to keep records of processing 949, to designate a data protection
officer 950, and to conduct impact assessments 951. Like the GDPR, the Data Protection Law
follows a risk-based approach, and the scope of the obligations is tailored to the risks for the
rights and freedoms of natural persons.

In addition to the strengthening of data protection principles and obligations, the protections
for special categories of personal data have been reinforced since the adoption of the
adequacy decision. The Data Protection Law 2001 already offered additional protection for
information about the racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious beliefs or other
beliefs of a similar nature, about membership in a trade union or other labour organisation,
about physical or mental health and the commission or alleged commission of an offence 952.
The Data Protection Law extends this protection to biometric and genetic data 953. As regards
the safeguards that apply to the processing of special categories of data, the Data Protection
Law allows the processing of special categories of data only in specific circumstances, and, in
certain cases requires the processing to be accompanied by additional safeguards 954. That was
already the case under the Data Protection Law 2001 955.




944
    Section 12 and Schedule 3 of the Data Protection Law. Similar to Article 13(4) GDPR, this does not apply
where and insofar as the data subject already has the information (see Section 12(5) of the Data Protection Law).
945
    Section 13 and Schedule 3 of the Data Protection Law. This obligation is subject to several exceptions, which
are similar to the exceptions listed in Article 14(5) GDPR. Where an exception applies, the controller must take
appropriate measures to protect individual rights, including by making the information publicly available (see
Section 13(5) Data Protection Law).
946
    Section 13(2A) Data Protection Law.
947
    Section 42 Data Protection Law.
948
    Section 32 Data Protection Law.
949
    Section 37(1) Data Protection Law and Part III General Provisions Regulation 2018.
950
    Section 47 Data Protection Law.
951
    Section 44 Data Protection Law.
952
    Section 2 Data Protection Law 2001.
953
    Section 111(1) Data Protection Law.
954
    Part II and III of Schedule 2 to the Data Protection Law. For example, similarly to the GDPR, the Data
Protection Law allows the processing of special categories of data where the data subject has given explicit
consent, where processing is based on a law or where processing is necessary to protect the vital interest of the
data subject.
955
    Schedule 3 to the Data Protection Law 2001.

                                                      125
In terms of rights, Part III of the Data Protection Law provides individuals with all of the key
data protection rights, notably the right of access, rectification, and erasure 956, and it also
provides for a right to restriction 957 and objection 958. In addition, the Law provides for a right
not to be subject to decisions based on automated processing 959.

Compared to the previous legislation, the Data Protection Law has strengthened the rights of
individuals in several ways. The right of access not only requires controllers to provide
individuals with information about the processing of their data (as was already the case under
the Data Protection Law 2001 960), but also to give access to personal data (including by
providing a copy) 961. Moreover, additional grounds to object to processing have been
added 962. For instance, individuals have a right to object to the processing of their personal
data where such processing is based exclusively on grounds of public interest or on the
legitimate interest of the controller 963. In addition, the data subject no longer has to apply to a
court to order the rectification and erasure of their personal data, as was required under the
Data Protection Law 2001, but instead can make a request directly to the controller 964.

Importantly, new rights have been introduced in the Guernsey Data Protection Law. This
includes a right for individuals not to be subject to a decision that is based solely on
automated processing and affects the significant interests of the data subject. 965. Such
automated decision making may only take place under certain conditions (e.g., only where
authorised by law or based on the data subject’s explicit consent) and subject to specific
safeguards (e.g., informing the individual about the processing, the logic involved and the
envisaged consequences, allowing the data subject to obtain human intervention) 966. In
addition, the Data Protection Law introduced a right to data portability that corresponds to the
same right available under the GDPR 967.

As is the case in the GDPR, the data subject rights are subject to certain restrictions intended
to allow the balancing of the data protection interests of individuals with objectives of general
public interest and with the fundamental rights and freedoms of others.

First, Part I of Schedule 8 allows the restriction of individual rights based on the nature of the
personal data being processed. These restrictions apply automatically whenever one of the
listed categories of personal data is being processed. The categories are listed in an exhaustive
manner and cover a narrowly construed set of situations, such as the provision of references in
confidence by the controller in the context of the education, employment or appointment of
956
    Section 21 Data Protection Law.
957
    Section 22 Data Protection Law.
958
    Sections 17 to 19 Data Protection Law. The Guernsey Data Protection Laws grants a right to object in three
situations: where processing takes place in the public interest, for direct marketing purposes, and for historical or
scientific purposes.
959
    Section 24 Data Protection Law.
960
    Section 7 Data Protection Law 2001.
961
    Section 15 Data Protection Law.
962
    Pursuant to Sections 10 and 11 Data Protection Law 2001, the data subject was entitled to request from the
controller to cease or not to begin any processing that would be likely to cause unwarranted damage or distress to
him or to another, and any processing for purposes of direct marketing.
963
    Section 18 Data Protection Law.
964
    Sections 20 and 21 Data Protection Law.
965
    Section 24(1) and (5) Data Protection Law.
966
    Section 24(2) and (3) Data Protection Law.
967
    Section 14 Data Protection Law.

                                                        126
the data subject, or personal data recorded by a candidate during an examination or marking.
These categories are not only very limited in scope, but also do not typically cover situations
where personal data is transferred to Guernsey from the EU.

Second, Part II of Schedule 8 sets out restrictions on grounds of prejudice. They can be
invoked only when (and to the extent that) the application of the provisions “would be likely
to prejudice” the legitimate aim pursued. For example, controllers can restrict data subject
rights to the extent that their application would be likely to prejudice the combat effectiveness
of the armed forces of the Crown 968, or would be likely to prejudice judicial independence or
the conduct of judicial proceedings 969.

The Data Protection Authority of Guernsey has issued interpretative guidance that clearly
frames the application of the exemptions. It clarifies the scope of the different exemptions,
including by means of examples, which helps to prevent these exemptions being
misunderstood and applied in an overly broad manner. It also explains how the requirements
of necessity and proportionality should be applied with respect to a specific exemption 970.

With respect to international transfers of personal data, i.e., concerning the potential onward
transfer of personal data that has been transferred from the EU, Guernsey has reorganised and
clarified its transfer regime and put in place a system that is very similar to the rules on
international transfers set out in Chapter V of the GDPR in terms of structure and
requirements. Section 55 of the Data Protection Law lays down a prohibition on transferring
data to unauthorised jurisdictions, except when specifically authorised by the Law. Authorised
jurisdictions are Member States of the European Union, as well as any country or
international organisation for which the European Commission has determined that it ensures
an adequate level of protection within the meaning of Article 45(2) of the GDPR 971.

The Data Protection Law further clarifies that countries which have been found adequate by
the European Commission are only considered as authorised jurisdictions as long as the

968
    Paragraph 6 of Part II of Schedule 8 to the Data Protection Law.
969
    Paragraph 11 of Part II of Schedule 8 to the Data Protection Law.
970
     The guidance is available at: https://www.odpa.gg/information-hub/organisations/exemptions/. First, it
clarifies that “Exemptions should be applied narrowly to specific personal data in specific circumstances. There
should be no ‘blanket’ application of exemptions. Consideration should be on a case-by-case basis taking into
account the type of personal data, the purpose of the processing and any adverse impact of the application of the
exemption on the data subject. […] Exemptions should be carefully considered, and their use fully justified. In
accordance with the accountability requirements of the Law and the expectations of the Authority, all decisions
to rely on an exemption should be documented and controllers should be prepared to share that documentation
with the Authority.” Second, the Data Protection Authority makes clear that controllers have to assess whether it
is necessary and proportionate to invoke an exemption in relation to the specific data subject right and the
specific set of personal data in question. Third, with respect to the prejudice test, the Data Protection Authority
explains that in order to rely on the restriction “it is necessary to demonstrate that the purpose of processing that
personal data would likely be prejudiced (e.g., to do so would have a damaging or detrimental effect on what is
being done) if the designated provision was complied with”. Moreover, the guidance confirms that the prejudice
test is a high threshold, requiring a “very significant and weighty chance of prejudice”.
971
    Pursuant to Section 111(1) Data Protection Law, an ‘authorised jurisdiction’ can also be a ‘designated
jurisdiction’. A ‘designated jurisdiction’ is defined in Section 111(1) Data Protection Law as the United
Kingdom, a country within the United Kingdom, any Crown Dependency and any sector within the former
categories, where designated by an Ordinance made by the Parliament of Guernsey. Such designation was made
for the United Kingdom by The Data Protection (Authorised Jurisdiction) (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Ordinance,
2019 during the Brexit transition period. The Ordinance expired on 31 December 2021 pursuant to an
amendment made by the Data Protection (Authorised Jurisdiction) (Bailiwick of Guernsey) (Amendment)
Ordinance, 2020.

                                                        127
adequacy finding is still in force 972. Guernsey has thus ensured an automatic alignment
between the adequacy decisions of the EU and its own data transfer authorisations.

Sections 56, 57 and 59 of the Data Protection Law set out the conditions for transfers to
unauthorised jurisdictions. Section 56 allows transfers if the controller or processor is satisfied
of the existence of appropriate safeguards and of a mechanism for data subjects to enforce
their rights and obtain effective legal remedies against the recipient. The instruments that can
be used to provide such safeguards are similar to those provided in Article 46 of the GDPR:
(1) a legally binding and enforceable agreement between public authorities, (2) binding
corporate rules 973, (3) standard data protection clauses 974, (4) an approved code of conduct
and (5) an approved certification mechanism 975.

Under the conditions laid down in Section 57, personal data can be transferred to unauthorised
jurisdictions if authorised by the Data Protection Authority 976. Section 57 explicitly requires
the Authority to take into account any opinions or decisions of the European Data Protection
Board in determining whether to authorise a transfer. In this area, Guernsey has thus ensured
that beyond the alignment of the law itself, also the interpretation of the law remains in line
with the interpretation within the EU.

Finally, transfers can take place on the basis of certain statutory grounds listed in Section
59(1) of the Data Protection Law 977. These statutory grounds for transfers overlap to a large
extent with the derogations for specific situations listed in Article 49 of the GDPR. Moreover,
the Guernsey authorities have confirmed that a transfer under Section 59(1) would need to be
justified on a case-by-case basis, i.e., each instance of transfer, and each piece of personal
data transferred would need to fulfil the specific statutory conditions in the relevant provision
of Section 59(1) in order for the transfer to be lawful. They have also confirmed that Section
59(1) of the Data Protection Law has to be interpreted in a manner equivalent to Article 49 of
the GDPR to preclude systematic or repetitive transfers.


972
    See the definition of ‘authorised jurisdiction’ in Section 111(1) Data Protection Law. After the EU-U.S.
Privacy Shield was invalidated by the Court of Justice of the European Union, the Guernsey Data Protection
Authority alerted organisations in Guernsey that they could no longer rely on the Privacy Shield for their
transfers of personal data. See press release of 24 July 2020, available at: https://www.odpa.gg/news/news-
article/?id=feff8843-a322-eb11-a813-000d3a2012fa.
973
    These can be approved by the Guernsey Data Protection Authority or by one of the authorities in the EU on
the basis of Article 47 GDPR. So far, the Guernsey Authority has not approved any binding corporate rules.
974
    Pursuant to Section 111(1) Data Protection Law, standard data protection clauses are those adopted by the
Commission on the basis of the GDPR or the Data Protection Directive, or those approved by the Guernsey Data
Protection Authority. The latter has not yet approved any such clauses.
975
    An approved code of conduct or an approved certification mechanisms have to be each combined with
binding and enforceable commitments of the recipient to apply the relevant safeguards in the mechanism,
including as regards data subject rights.
976
    An authorisation can be granted if the safeguards listed in Section 56(2) Data Protection Law are in place or if
safeguards are ensured by contractual clauses, and there is a mechanism in place for data subjects to enforce their
data subject rights and obtain effective legal remedies against the recipient, see Section 57(2)(a) and (b) Data
Protection Law.
977
    Pursuant to Section 59(1) Data Protection Law, personal data may be transferred to an unauthorised
jurisdiction for instance where required by an order or a judgment of a court or tribunal having the force of law
in Guernsey, where required by a decision of a Guernsey public authority based on an international agreement
imposing an international obligation on Guernsey, where explicit consent of the individual has been obtained,
where necessary for the performance of a contract with or in the interest of a data subject, or where necessary to
protect the vital interests of the data subject or of another individual and the data subject is incapable of giving
consent or the controller cannot reasonably be expected to obtain the explicit consent of the data subject.

                                                       128
    1.2. Oversight, enforcement and redress

Guernsey has also reformed its system of oversight and enforcement of the Data Protection
Law. Oversight and enforcement are carried out by the Data Protection Authority (the
Authority), which replaces the Commissioner under the Data Protection Law 2001 978. The
Authority is composed of a chairman, four to eight other voting members (the Members), and
a commissioner (an ex officio and non-voting member) 979. Compared to the previous
Commissioner, the independence of the Authority has been significantly strengthened in
several ways.

First, the independence of the Authority is explicitly provided by Section 62 of the Data
Protection Law, which requires it to act independently, free from direct or indirect external
influence and without seeking or taking instructions from any person. Second, the Authority
now enjoys a status of a legal person separate from its members 980. Third, the Law lays down
specific requirements for the appointment and dismissal of the Members and the
Commissioner. The Members are appointed by resolution of the Parliament of Guernsey
among individuals nominated by a Parliamentary Committee 981. The Commissioner, which is
the chief executive of the Authority, is appointed by the Authority itself 982. They must have
the qualifications, experience and skills necessary to exercise and perform their functions, in
particular in the area of data protection. In addition, the Members must have a strong sense of
integrity and must be able to maintain confidentiality 983.

Members can only be removed from office by a resolution of the Parliament of Guernsey, on
the basis of a report and recommendation from the Parliamentary Committee, on the basis that
the specific conditions for dismissal as set out in the Law are met 984. The conditions for the
dismissal of the Commissioner by the Authority are equally set out in the Law 985. The

978
     Parts XI and XII Data Protection Law. The general functions of the Authority include oversight and
enforcement of the Data Protection Law, promoting awareness (among the public, controllers and processors), as
well as issuing opinions, guidance and public statements. In addition, the Authority may engage in international
co-operation, including by developing international cooperation mechanisms and providing international mutual
assistance. See Sections 61 to 65 Data Protection Law.
979
    Schedule 6, Paragraph 1 Data Protection Law. At present, the Authority is composed of a chairperson and six
voting members.
980
    Section 60(1) Data Protection Law. This means that the Authority can directly employ staff, where in the past
it relied on the government to do so and could only employ civil servants, and that it can separate its banking
arrangements and internal audits from the government. See also Annual Report 2018 of the Office of the Data
Protection Authority, p. 13.
981
    The Committee is the States of Guernsey Committee for Home Affairs, which is a committee of the States of
Guernsey. It consists of a President and four members who are members of the Parliament and up to two non-
voting members appointed by the Committee who are not to be members of the Parliament.
982
    Schedule 6, Paragraph 5 Data Protection Law.
983
    Schedule 6, Paragraph 1(3) Data Protection Law. The Code of Practice for Members of the Guernsey Data
Protection Authority sets out ethical values and further rules on standard of conduct of the Members of the
Authority.
984
     Members can only be dismissed on grounds of serious misconduct, conviction of a criminal offence,
bankruptcy, incapacity because of physical or mental illness, other inability to perform their duties, or
ineligibility, see Paragraph 2(1) of Schedule 6 to the Data Protection Law. The Committee can only recommend
dismissal based on a serious misconduct if a panel consisting of three or more individuals (none of whom is a
member of the Parliament of Guernsey, the Committee or the Authority) appointed by the Committee determines
the Member to be guilty of a serious misconduct. Paragraph 2(2) of Schedule 6 to the Data Protection Law.
985
    Paragraph 5(6) of Schedule 6 to the Data Protection Law. The Commissioner can only be removed on
grounds of serious misconduct, conviction of a criminal offence, bankruptcy, physical or mental illness, or if
otherwise unable or unfit to perform the Commissioner’s duties.

                                                      129
Commissioner may not engage in any other employment, occupation or business, or receive
any benefits other than the salary, allowances and other expenses awarded by the Authority,
except with the approval of the Authority 986.

The Data Protection Law has also equipped the Authority with additional investigatory and
enforcement powers that are very similar to those foreseen in the GDPR. In particular, the
Authority can conduct audits 987, investigate individual complaints 988 and carry out general
inquiries on its own initiative 989. In carrying out its functions, the Authority has access to all
relevant information 990. Upon finding of a violation of the Data Protection Law, the authority
can impose various sanctions, ranging from warnings and reprimands to binding orders (for
instance to discontinue processing, bring processing into compliance with the Law, rectify,
erase or restrict processing or suspend the transfer of personal data) 991.

Moreover, the Authority can impose administrative fines for certain violations of the Law 992.
The fines must be effective, proportionate and have a deterrent effect 993. As regards the
amount of fines, the Authority has to take into account the same factors as those listed in
Article 83(2) GDPR, i.e., the intentional or negligent character of the infringement, any action
taken by the controller or processor to mitigate the damage suffered by data subjects, duration
of the infringement etc. 994. In addition, several violations of the Data Protection Law continue
to constitute offences and may therefore be subject to criminal sanctions 995.

As regards possibilities for individuals to obtain redress, the Guernsey system continues to
offer various avenues, including the possibility to lodge a complaint with the Authority 996, to
obtain judicial redress directly against controllers and processors (both private operators and




986
    Paragraph 5(8) of Schedule 6 to the Data Protection Law.
987
    Paragraph 9 of Schedule 7 to the Data Protection Law.
988
    Sections 67 and 68 Data Protection Law.
989
    Section 69 Data Protection Law.
990
    Paragraph 1 of Schedule 7 Data Protection Law.
991
    Sections 71 to 73 Data Protection Law. Failure to comply with an order from the Authority is an offence
under the Law.
992
    Section 74 Data Protection Law: these violations are (1) failure to verify the validity of consent of a child
under 13 years of age under section 10(2)(f), (2) failure to inform the data subject of anonymisation, in breach of
section 11(1)(b), (3) breach of any duty imposed on the person concerned by any provision of Part IV (except
section 31), V, VI, VII (except section 46) or VIII (duties of controllers and processors, administrative duties,
security of personal data, data protection impact assessments and prior consultation, data protection officers) (4)
breach of the duty imposed on an accredited monitoring body by section 53(2), (5) breach of any duty imposed
on the person concerned by section 6(1) on accountability, including a breach of the data protection principle
relating to lawfulness of processing, (6) breach of any duty imposed on the person concerned under Part III, (fa)
failure to comply with an order of the Authority under section 73(2), (7) transfer of personal data to a person in
an unauthorised jurisdiction in breach of section 55, or (h) breach of any provision of any Ordinance or
regulations made under the Law imposing a duty on a controller or processor). For example, in 2020, the
Authority imposed two fines, one of £80 000 and one of £10 000. More information is available at:
https://www.odpa.gg/actions-weve-taken/.
993
    Section 74(3) Data Protection Law.
994
    Section 74(2) Data Protection Law.
995
    This for example applies to obtaining personal data or disclosing personal data to another person without
consent of the controller (or selling that personal data), obstructing the Authority, failing to comply with an order
of the Authority, providing false, deceptive or misleading information to the Authority , and impersonating an
Authority official, Sections 87 to 89 Data Protection Law.
996
    Section 67 Data Protection Law.

                                                        130
public authorities) 997 and obtain compensation for damages 998. In addition, individuals can
obtain judicial redress against decisions of the Authority 999.

Despite its relatively small size, the Authority plays an active role, both when it comes to its
engagement with stakeholders and exercising its oversight role. The Authority handles a
number of files, including inspections, notifications, written questions and complaints each
year. For example, between 25 May and 31 December 2018, the Authority handled 34
complaints and conducted 30 investigations 1000. In 2019, the Authority handled 67 complaints
and conducted 50 investigations, which led to a breach determination in 8 cases and
reprimands being imposed in 6 cases. Moreover, the Authority held 11 public events and
organised sessions for organisations every two weeks, in which it provided information and
advice 1001. In 2020, the Authority issued seven reprimands, one warning, two fines and one
order and again dealt with a number of complaints and investigations 1002. The Authority also
engages in various outreach activities on an ongoing basis, such as presentations for both the
private and public sector, for instance on data protection for start-ups and small businesses, on
individual rights or on how to respond to data subject access requests 1003.

2. ACCESS TO AND USE OF PERSONAL DATA TRANSFERRED FROM THE
   EUROPEAN UNION BY PUBLIC AUTHORITIES IN GUERNSEY

      2.1. General legal framework

The limitations and safeguards that apply to the collection and subsequent use of personal
data for purposes of criminal law enforcement and national security follow from Guernsey’s
international obligations in the area of fundamental rights and personal data protection, from
the rules that apply to the processing of personal data by the public sector, as well as from
specific laws regulating access to data by Guernsey public authorities.

First, as an exercise of power by a public authority, government access in Guernsey must be
conducted in full respect of the law. The ratification of the European Convention of Human
Rights by the United Kingdom has been extended to Guernsey since 1953 1004. The right to
respect for private and family life (and the right to data protection as part of that right) is
protected by the Human Rights (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law 2000, which incorporates the
European Convention on Human Rights into Guernsey law 1005. Article 8 of the Convention
provides that any interference with privacy must be in accordance with the law, in the
interests of one of the aims set out in Article 8(2) and proportionate in light of that aim.


997
    Section 79 Data Protection Law.
998
    Section 79(3) Data Protection Law.
999
    Sections 82 and 83 Data Protection Law.
1000
     See Annual report May-Dec 2018, available at: https://www.odpa.gg/about/our-governance/annual-reports/.
1001
     See Annual report 2019, available at: https://www.odpa.gg/about/our-governance/annual-reports/.
1002
     See Annual report 2020, available at: https://www.odpa.gg/about/our-governance/annual-reports/. More
details on the Authority’s enforcement action, including on actions taken in 2021, are provided on the
Authority’s website, available at: https://www.odpa.gg/actions-weve-taken/.
1003
     For recent courses and presentations, see for example the events set out on the website of the Authority,
available at: https://www.odpa.gg/events/.
1004
     See Declaration contained in a letter from the United Kingdom’s Permanent Representative to the Council of
Europe, dated 23 October 1953, registered at the Secretariat General on 23 October 1953 – available at:
https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list2?module=declarations-by-treaty&numSte=005&codeNature=0.
1005
     Section 1(1) and (2) Human Rights (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law 2000.

                                                     131
Article 8 also requires that the interference is “foreseeable”, i.e., have a clear, accessible basis
in law, and that the law contains appropriate safeguards to prevent abuse.

In addition, in its case law 1006, the European Court of Human Rights has specified that any
interference with the right to privacy and data protection should be subject to an effective,
independent and impartial oversight system that must be provided for either by a judge or by
another independent body 1007 (e.g., an administrative authority or a parliamentary body).

Moreover, individuals must be provided with an effective remedy, and the European Court of
Human Rights has clarified that the remedy must be offered by an independent and impartial
body which has adopted its own rules of procedure, consisting of members that must hold or
have held high judicial office or be experienced lawyers, and that there must be no evidential
burden to be overcome in order to lodge an application with it. In undertaking its examination
of complaints by individuals, the independent and impartial body should have access to all
relevant information, including closed materials. Finally, it should have the powers to remedy
non-compliance 1008.

Second, the Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to
Automatic Processing of Personal Data (Convention 108) also applies in Guernsey 1009. Article
9 of Convention 108 provides that derogations from the general data protection principles, the
rules governing special categories of data and data subject rights are only permissible when
such derogation is provided for by the law of the Party and constitutes a necessary measure in
a democratic society in the interests of protecting State security, public safety, the monetary
interests of the State or the suppression of criminal offences, or for protecting the data subject
or the rights and freedoms of others.

Therefore, through adherence to the European Convention of Human Rights and to
Convention 108, Guernsey is subject to a number of obligations, enshrined in international
law and that frame its system of government access on the basis of principles, safeguards and
individual rights similar to those guaranteed under EU law and applicable to the Member
States. Furthermore, as far as the ECHR is concerned, compliance with these obligations is
subject to the judicial control of the European Court of Human Rights.

Third, the Guernsey Parliament has adopted specific provisions for the processing of personal
data for law enforcement purposes, i.e., the Data Protection (Law Enforcement and Related
Matters) (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Ordinance, 2018 (LEO). The material scope of the LEO is
similar to the one of the Law Enforcement Directive. It applies to the processing of personal
data by competent authorities 1010 for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection

1006
     According to Section 2(1)(a) Human Rights (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law 2000, a court or tribunal in
Guernsey that is determining a question which has arisen in connection with a Convention right must take into
account any judgment, decision, declaration or advisory opinion of the European Court of Human Rights.
1007
     European Court of Human Rights, Klass and others v. Germany, Application no. 5029/71, paragraphs 17-51.
1008
     European Court of Human Rights, Kennedy v. the United Kingdom, Application no. 26839/05, (Kennedy),
paragraphs 167 and 190.
1009
     Declaration contained in a letter from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to the Council of
Europe, dated 26 August 1987, handed to the Secretary General at the time of deposit of the instrument of
ratification,   on    26     August       1987,    available  at:   https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-
list?module=declarations-by-treaty&numSte=108&codeNature=0.
1010
     Competent authorities in Guernsey are listed in Section 50(a) LEO and include the States (i.e. the executive
governments of the islands of Guernsey, Alderney and Sark, see also Section 111(1) Data Protection Law), a

                                                      132
or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the
safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security or national security, as
well as for exercising or performing any power or duty conferred or imposed on a public
authority by a criminal proceeds enactment 1011.

Furthermore, the data protection principles of lawfulness and fairness 1012, purpose
limitation1013, data minimisation 1014, accuracy 1015, storage limitation 1016 and security1017 are
retained in the LEO in similar terms as in the Law Enforcement Directive. In essence, the
processing of personal data by a competent authority for a law enforcement purpose is
permitted only if and to the extent that it is carried out in the context of a function imposed by
law and the data subject has given consent, the processing is necessary for the performance of
a task carried out by the authority, or an enactment authorises or requires such processing 1018.
In addition, the LEO imposes specific transparency obligations 1019 and recognises the same


public committee, a holder of public office, a statutory body, a court or tribunal of Guernsey, any person hearing
or determining an appeal, or conducting a public inquiry, under any enactment, the salaried police force of the
Island of Guernsey, a parish Douzaine, and any person exercising powers similar to the aforementioned persons
in any country other than Guernsey. Competent authorities are also any other person who exercises a function of
public nature for a criminal law enforcement purpose, in respect of Guernsey or any other country, and any other
prescribed person. The abovementioned authorities are considered as competent authorities under the LEO only
when exercising or performing a function conferred or imposed on the person by law or by a States Resolution
for a law enforcement purpose.
1011
     Sections 50 LEO and 111(1) of the Data Protection Law. The criminal proceeds enactments, which are listed
in the LEO, authorise and govern the tracing, freezing, seizure and forfeiture of the proceeds of crime. The
personnel involved in these processes and procedures are usually criminal law enforcement officers. However, in
Guernsey these processes and procedures are carried out by way of civil procedures and proceedings.
1012
     Section 5 LEO. The processing of personal data by a competent authority for a law enforcement purpose is
permitted only if and to the extent that it is carried out in the context of a function imposed by law and (1) the
data subject has given consent, (2) the processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out by the
authority, or (3) an enactment authorises or requires such processing.
1013
     Section 6 LEO. Section 6(2) LEO allows for secondary processing of data for law enforcement purposes
only if the consent of the data subject has been obtained, if it is for a historical or scientific purpose (related to
the secondary law enforcement purpose), or the secondary processing is carried out in the context of a controller
discharging a function imposed by law. In any case, such secondary processing must be necessary and
proportionate to the secondary law enforcement purpose.
1014
     Section 7 LEO
1015
     Section 8 LEO. In addition, as required also by the LED, competent authorities must make a clear distinction
between personal data relating to different categories of data subjects, such as persons suspected of having
committed an offence, persons convicted of a criminal offence, persons who are victims of a criminal offence
and witnesses.
1016
     Section 9 LEO.
1017
     See Section 10, as well as Sections 32 and 33 LEO. Section 3 LEO furthermore lists the provisions of the
Guernsey Data Protection Law that apply to personal data processed for criminal law enforcement purposes.
These are the provisions on the territorial and material scope, household exemptions, the nature of consent
(except in the case of criminal data), rules regarding anonymised data (except the notification requirement), the
duties of controllers and processors to keep records, make returns and cooperate with the Authority, all the
provisions on the Authority and civil and criminal proceedings.
1018
     Section 5 of the LEO. Pursuant to Schedule 2 LEO, stricter conditions apply to the processing of special
category data. The processing of such data is lawful when the data subject has given consent and the controller
has put in place appropriate safeguards for the significant interests of the data subject. Alternatively, the
processing is lawful where the processing is strictly necessary for the criminal law enforcement purpose,
appropriate safeguards are in place and at least one condition specified in Schedule 2 (e.g., the information was
made public by the data subject; processing is necessary in order to comply with an order or a judgment of a
court; legal proceedings; processing is necessary for the discharge of any functions of a court or tribunal acting
in its judicial capacity; obtaining legal advice; etc.) is fulfilled.
1019
     Section 12 LEO requires that data subjects are provided with information on the identity and contact details
of the controller/controller’s representative and the data protection officer, the purposes for processing, data
subject rights, the complaints mechanism and the possibility of requesting the Authority to bring civil

                                                        133
data subject rights as the LED 1020. In particular, individuals enjoy a right of access 1021,
correction 1022 and deletion 1023 and have the right not to be subject to automated decision-
making 1024. Competent authorities are also required to implement data protection by design
and default 1025, to keep records of processing activities 1026, and, in certain situations, to
conduct data protection impact assessments and to pre-consult the Data Protection
Authority 1027. Moreover, they are required to put in place appropriate measures to ensure
security of processing 1028 and are subject to specific obligations in case of a data breach,
including notification of such breaches to the Authority and data subjects 1029. Like in the Law
Enforcement Directive, there is also a requirement for a controller (unless it is a court or other
judicial authority acting in a judicial capacity) to designate a data protection officer who
assists the controller in complying with its obligations as well as monitoring that
compliance 1030. Finally, the LEO contains specific provisions on international transfers of
personal data 1031. The provisions substantially echo those in the Law Enforcement Directive.
Essentially, transfers to “unauthorised jurisdictions” 1032 are prohibited unless they are
necessary for a law enforcement purpose and based on appropriate safeguards 1033. In the
absence of appropriate safeguards, transfers to unauthorised jurisdictions are only possible in

proceedings before a court. The controller has two options: (1) publish the information, or (2) give the
information directly to (i.e., notify) the data subject. Moreover, when reasonable in a specific case in order to
enable a data subject to exercise his or her rights, the controller Is obliged to provide further information,
including on the legal basis for processing, the expected storage period for the data (or the criteria to determine
the same), categories of recipients and any other Information necessary to enable the data subject to exercise the
data subject rights.
1020
     Similarly to Article 12 LED, Section 23 LEO further specifies the modalities for exercising these rights,
allowing competent authorities to refuse to comply with a request from an individual or to charge a reasonable
fee for complying with the request if the request is manifestly unfounded, frivolous, vexatious, unnecessarily
repetitive or otherwise excessive. Moreover, pursuant to Section 19 LEO, the rights of access, correction and
deletion do not apply to the processing of judicial data in the course of a criminal investigation. Judicial data
refers to personal data contained in a judicial decision or in other documents, relating to the crime-related
investigation or (as the case may be) the proceedings relating to a criminal offence within or outside the
Bailiwick, which are created by or on behalf of a court or other judicial authority.
1021
     Section 13 LEO. In addition, Section 13 provides individuals with a right to obtain a confirmation as to
whether or not personal data relating to the individual is being processed, as well as to access that data and
obtain information relating to its processing (e.g., on the purpose, categories of personal data concerned, the
source of the personal data, the recipients, etc.).
1022
     Section 14 LEO.
1023
     Section 15 LEO.
1024
     Section 17 LEO.
1025
     Section 27 LEO.
1026
     Section 3(1)(d) LEO and Section 37 Data Protection Law.
1027
     Sections 37 and 38 LEO.
1028
     Sections 32 and 33 LEO.
1029
     Sections 34 and 35 LEO.
1030
     Section 39 to 42 LEO.
1031
     Sections 43 to 47 LEO.
1032
     Pursuant to Section 50(1) LEO, authorised jurisdictions are Guernsey, the EU Member States, any country or
any international organisation that the Commission has determined ensures an adequate level of protection
within the meaning of Article 36 LED and any designated jurisdiction. Such designation was made for the
United Kingdom by The Data Protection (Authorised Jurisdiction) (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Ordinance, 2019
during the Brexit transition period. The Ordinance expired on 31 December 2020.
1033
     Section 43(1) in conjunction with Section 44 LEO. Appropriate safeguards are in place where provided by a
legal instrument binding the intended recipient, such as a legally binding and enforceable agreement between the
controller and the recipient, or where the controller, having assessed all the circumstances surrounding the
transfer, concludes that appropriate safeguards exist to protect the data. The controller is required to keep
detailed written records of any transfer relying on appropriate safeguards, and when relying on appropriate
safeguards on the basis of the circumstances surrounding the transfer, the controller must notify the Authority of
the categories of data transferred on that basis.

                                                       134
specific circumstances that are listed in the law in an exhaustive manner and correspond to the
‘derogations' set forth in the Law Enforcement Directive 1034.

Under similar conditions as under the Law Enforcement Directive, Section 24 of the LEO
specifies that certain specific provisions of the LEO 1035 may be restricted to the extent that
and as long as, having regard to the significant interests of the data subject, the restriction is a
necessary and proportionate measure for one of the purposes listed in the law 1036.

Moreover, Schedule 3 to the LEO imposes the same restrictions (where relevant in the context
of the LEO) to specific provisions 1037 of the LEO as the ones provided by the Data Protection
Law 1038. First, Schedule 3 allows the restriction of individual rights based on the nature of the
personal data being processed. These restrictions apply automatically whenever one of the
listed categories of personal data is being processed. These categories are listed in an
exhaustive manner and cover a very limited, narrowly construed set of situations. In addition,
they do not typically cover situations where personal data is transferred to Guernsey from the
EU 1039. Second, Schedule 3 sets out restrictions on grounds of prejudice. They can be invoked
only when and to the extent that the application of the provisions “would be likely to
prejudice” the legitimate aim pursued. For example, controllers can restrict data subject rights
to the extent that their application would be likely to prejudice the combat effectiveness of the
armed forces of the Crown 1040, or would be likely to prejudice judicial independence or the
conduct of judicial proceedings 1041. As explained in section 1.1., the Data Protection
Authority of Guernsey has issued interpretative guidance that clearly frames the application of
the restrictions. It clarifies the scope of the different restrictions, including by means of
examples, which helps to prevent them being misunderstood and applied in an overly broad



1034
      Section 45 LEO sets out the special circumstances in which international transfers can take place in the
absence of appropriate safeguards, i.e. for the protection of vital interests of individuals, to safeguard legitimate
interests of the data subject, to prevent immediate and serious threats to the public or national security of any
country, in individual cases for a law enforcement purpose, and in individual cases in the context of legal
proceedings and legal advice relating to a law enforcement purpose.
1035
     The provisions that may be restricted are those that concern the provision of information to the data subject,
i.e., the transparency obligations and the data subject’s right to access.
1036
     Pursuant to Section 19 LEO, these purposes are to avoid obstructing official or legal inquiries, investigations
or procedures; to avoid prejudicing the prevention, detection, investigation or prosecution of criminal offences or
the execution of criminal penalties; to protect public security; to protect national security; or to protect the
significant interests of others. In case of restriction, the controller must provide the data subject as soon as
practicable with a statement informing about the restriction, along with the reasons and the possible redress
avenue.
1037
     Most of the restrictions allow the restriction of provisions in Part III LEO, i.e., the data subject rights, as well
as of the data protection principles that correspond to these rights. The exemption on public security in paragraph
18 of Schedule 3 allows the restriction of Parts II to VIII LEO, i.e., of the provisions on the data protection duties
and principles, the data subject rights, the duties of controllers and processors, the security of personal data, data
protection impact assessments and prior consultation, data protection officers and on transfers to other
jurisdictions.
1038
     Only those exemptions provided by the Data Protection Law that are not relevant in the context of the LEO
have not been included in Schedule 3, such as confidential references given by the controller, judicial and crown
appointments, examination and marking data, management forecasting or planning, financial service data, trusts
exemption and exemption on journalism, art, literature and academia.
1039
     The exemptions apply automatically to privileged items and to personal data withheld by a court or tribunal,
see paragraphs 3 and 15 of Schedule 3 to the LEO.
1040
     Paragraph 4 of Schedule 3 to LEO.
1041
     Paragraph 7 of Schedule 3to the LEO.

                                                          135
manner. It also explains how the requirements of necessity and proportionality should be
applied with respect to specific restrictions 1042.

The processing of personal data for national security purposes in Guernsey is either subject to
the provisions of the Data Protection Law described in Section 1.1., or to the provisions of
LEO as described above. As explained above, the LEO applies to the processing of personal
data by a competent authority, including for the purpose of safeguarding against or preventing
threats to national security. The Data Protection Law applies if the processing of personal data
for national security purposes is not conducted by a competent authority. While both the
LEO 1043 and the Data Protection Law 1044 provide for an exemption from specified provisions
for national security purposes, these provisions may only be restricted to the extent that their
application would be likely to prejudice national security. In addition, the application of these
exemptions has been clarified through detailed guidance. As recalled above for restrictions
applicable in the field of criminal law enforcement, in particular, relying on the exemption
must be necessary and proportionate in a democratic society. The exemption cannot be
invoked in a blanket manner but can be relied upon only the basis of a case-by-case analysis
and considering the actual consequences of applying the relevant provision. Controllers must
be able to show that there is a real possibility of an adverse effect on national security if the
relevant provision is applied. All decisions to rely on an exemption have to be documented
and controllers must be prepared to share that documentation with the Data Protection
Authority 1045.

Moreover, according to paragraph 18(2) of Schedule 3 to the LEO and paragraph 18(2) of
Schedule 8 to the Data Protection Law, a certificate signed by Her Majesty’s Procureur can
confirm the legality of the reliance on the restriction 1046. That means that the certificate serves
as conclusive evidence of the fact that a restriction from one or more provision specified in
the certificate is required for the purposes of national security. It is important to note that the

1042
     The guidance specifically refers to the restrictions set out in the Data Protection Law. As these overlap with
the exemptions provided by the LEO (see footnote 35), the guidance applies in the same manner to the
interpretation of the restrictions in the LEO. The guidance is available at: https://www.odpa.gg/information-
hub/organisations/exemptions/. First, it clarifies that “Exemptions should be applied narrowly to specific
personal data in specific circumstances. There should be no ‘blanket’ application of exemptions. Consideration
should be on a case-by-case basis taking into account the type of personal data, the purpose of the processing and
any adverse impact of the application of the exemption on the data subject. […] Exemptions should be carefully
considered, and their use fully justified. In accordance with the accountability requirements of the Law and the
expectations of the Authority, all decisions to rely on an exemption should be documented and controllers should
be prepared to share that documentation with the Authority.” Second, the Data Protection Authority makes clear
that controllers have to assess whether it is necessary and proportionate to invoke a restriction in relation to the
specific data subject right and the specific set of personal data in question. Third, with respect to the prejudice
test, the Data Protection Authority explains that in order to rely on the restriction “it is necessary to demonstrate
that the purpose of processing that personal data would likely be prejudiced (e.g., to do so would have a
damaging or detrimental effect on what is being done) if the designated provision was complied with”.
Moreover, the guidance confirms that the prejudice test is a high threshold, requiring a “very significant and
weighty chance of prejudice”.
1043
     Pursuant to Paragraph 18 of Schedule 3 LEO, the application of the provisions in Parts II to VIII may be
restricted, provided that the applicable conditions are fulfilled.
1044
     Pursuant to paragraph 18 of Schedule 8 Data Protection Law, the application of the provisions in Parts II to
XII and XV may be restricted, provided that the applicable conditions are fulfilled.
1045
        See the Guernsey Data Protection Authority’s guidance on exemptions, available at:
https://www.odpa.gg/information-hub/guidance/exemptions/.
1046
     To date, no such certificate has been issued under Guernsey current data protection framework, nor under its
predecessor, the Data Protection (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law, 2001.

                                                        136
national security certificate does not provide for an additional ground for restricting data
protection rights and obligations for national security reasons. In other words, the controller or
processor can only rely on a certificate when it has concluded that it is necessary to rely on
the national security restriction which, as explained above, must be applied on a case-by-case
basis 1047. Even if a national security certificate applies to the matter in question, the Guernsey
Data Protection Authority can investigate whether or not reliance on the national security
restriction was justified in a specific case 1048. Moreover, any person directly affected by the
issuing of a certificate may appeal to the Royal Court. The Royal Court will review the
decision to issue a certificate and decide whether there were reasonable grounds for issuing it.
The Court can consider a wide range of issues, including necessity, proportionality and
lawfulness, having regard to the impact on the rights of data subjects and balancing the need
to safeguard national security. As a result, the Court can quash the certificate or determine
that the certificate does not apply to specific personal data which is the subject of the
appeal 1049.

It follows from the above that limitations and conditions are in place under the applicable
Guernsey legal provisions, as interpreted by the Guernsey Data Protection Authority, to
ensure that these exemptions and restrictions remain within the boundaries of what is
necessary and proportionate to protect criminal law enforcement and national security.

       2.2. Access and use by Guernsey public authorities for criminal law enforcement
            purposes

In Guernsey, criminal law enforcement functions are carried out by the Island Police Force,
which is headed by the Chief Officer. Guernsey law imposes a number of limitations on how
the Police Force has access to and uses personal data for criminal law enforcement purposes,
and it also provides oversight and redress mechanisms in this area. The conditions under
which access to personal data can take place and the safeguards applicable to the use of these
powers are assessed in the following sections.

          2.2.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

Personal data transferred under the adequacy decision and processed by organisations in
Guernsey may be obtained by Guernsey criminal law enforcement authorities by means of
investigative measures under the Police Procedures and Criminal Evidence (Bailiwick of
Guernsey) Law 2003 (PPCE), on the basis of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers
(Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law 2003 (RIPL), or on the basis of anti-money laundering
legislation 1050.


1047
       See the Guernsey Data Protection Authority’s guidance on exemptions, available at:
https://www.odpa.gg/information-hub/organisations/exemptions/.
1048
     Section 4(2) LEO and Section 6(2)(g) Data Protection Law require the controller to be in a position to
demonstrate that it has complied with the law. This implies that an intelligence service would need to
demonstrate to the Data Protection Authority that when relying on the restriction, it has considered the specific
circumstances of the case.
1049
     Paragraph 18(4) to (11) Data Protection Law and paragraph 18(4) to (11) Data Protection Law.
1050
     In addition, under Guernsey law, UK authorities can lawfully operate in Guernsey to access personal data for
criminal law enforcement purposes where these operations are not prohibited by Guernsey law, or the operations
are specifically authorised by legislation in force in Guernsey. For the powers that can be exercised in Guernsey
by UK authorities, see the Commission Implementing Decision of 28.6.2021 pursuant to Regulation (EU)

                                                      137
The PPCE provides the Guernsey police with a legal basis for accessing personal data held by
commercial operators through searches and seizures. The PPCE lays down detailed rules on
the scope and application of these measures, aimed at ensuring that the interference with the
rights of individuals will be limited to what is necessary for a specific criminal investigation
and proportionate to the pursued purpose. Searches and seizures may only take place on the
basis of a court-issued search warrant 1051 and the issuing of such warrant is subject to specific
procedural and substantive requirements.

More specifically, a police officer may apply for a search warrant to the Bailiff 1052 or an
appropriate judicial officer in Alderney or Sark 1053. An application for a warrant must set out
the grounds for the application, the premises to be searched and, as far as practicable, the
articles or persons to be sought 1054.

A search warrant may be issued only if the Bailiff/judicial officer is satisfied that there are
reasonable grounds 1055 to believe that (1) a serious arrestable offence 1056 has been committed;
(2) there is material which is likely to be of substantial value to the investigation of the
offence; (3) the material is likely to be relevant evidence; and (4) it does not consist of or
include items that are subject to legal professional privilege or otherwise excluded 1057.

In terms of formal requirements, the warrant must specify the identity of the person who
applied for it, the date of issuance, the enactment under which it is issued, the premise to be
searched and, in as far as practicable, the articles or persons to be sought 1058. The police


2016/679 on the adequate protection of personal data by the United Kingdom, available at:
https://commission.europa.eu/system/files/2021-
06/decision_on_the_adequate_protection_of_personal_data_by_the_united_kingdom_-
_general_data_protection_regulation_en.pdf.
1051
     Pursuant to Sections 12 and 13 PPCE, warrantless searches may only take place in exceptional circumstances
that do not appear relevant in the context of data transfers covered by an adequacy decision adopted under the
GDPR. In particular, a police officer may search a premise for the purpose of (1) executing a warrant of arrest;
(2) arresting a person for an arrestable offence; (3) recapturing any person whomsoever who is unlawfully at
large and whom he is pursuing; or (4) saving life or limb or preventing serious damage to property. In addition, a
warrantless search may take place on a premise occupied or controller by a person under arrest, if the police have
reasonable grounds to suspect that there is evidence on the premise that relates to that offence, or a
connected/similar offence.
1052
     The Bailiff is the most senior judge of Guernsey’s Royal Court and is also the President of the Court of
Appeal.
1053
     In Alderney the appropriate judicial officer is the Chairman of the Court of Alderney or, if he is absent or
unable to act, a Jurat of the Court of Alderney authorised by him to act in that capacity on his behalf. In Sark the
appropriate judicial officer is the Seneschal of Sark or, if he is absent or unable to act, his deputy.
1054
     Section 10(2) PPCE.
1055
     The test of ‘reasonable grounds to believe’ for the exercise of a power contains both a subjective and
objective element. First, the officer making the application needs to genuinely believe that a serious arrestable
offence has been committed, and second, there must be an objective basis for that belief. It sets a higher standard
to satisfy than ‘reasonable suspicion’, which is the basis for a police officer’s arrest of a suspect, see Blackstones
Criminal Practice (2019 edition) D1.4.
1056
     Section 90 and Schedule 4 PPCE set out which offenses qualify as ‘serious arrestable offence’, covering for
instance treason, murder, manslaughter, rape, kidnapping etc.
1057
     In addition, one of the following conditions must be met: (1) it is not practicable to communicate with any
person entitled to grant entry to the premises; (2) it is practicable to communicate with a person entitled to grant
entry to the premises but it is not practicable to communicate with any person entitled to grant access to the
evidence; (3) entry to the premises will not be granted unless a warrant is produced; and (4) the purpose of a
search may be frustrated or seriously prejudiced unless a police officer arriving at the premises can secure
immediate entry to them.
1058
     Section 10(6) PPCE.

                                                        138
officer carrying out the search must provide the occupier of the searched premise with the
warrant, or in case the latter is not present, leave a copy of the warrant 1059.

A police officer who is lawfully on any premises may seize anything at that premise if (s)he
has reasonable ground for believing that it has been obtained in consequence of the
commission of an offence and that it is necessary to seize it in order to prevent it being
concealed, lost, damaged, altered or destroyed 1060. Moreover, the police officer may require
any information which is stored in electronic form and is accessible from the premises to be
produced in a form in which it can be taken away and in which it is visible and legible,
provided that (s)he has reasonable grounds for believing that it is evidence in relation to an
offence which he is investigating or any other offence, or that it has been obtained in
consequence of the commission of an offence, and that it is necessary to do so to prevent it
being concealed, lost, damaged, tampered with or destroyed 1061.

Specific limitations and safeguards also apply to the use of investigatory powers by public
authorities in Guernsey. The use of investigatory powers to obtain information on
communications is governed by the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Bailiwick of
Guernsey) Law 2003 (RIPL) 1062. The RIPL regulates notably the interception of
communications, acquisition of communications data (i.e., metadata stored by the service
providers), the use of surveillance (such as covert investigations), and the investigation of
electronic data protected by encryption (for example to obtain passwords allowing access to
electronic devices) by a specified list of public authorities.

Section 1 RIPL introduces a general principle of confidentiality of communications by
providing that it is an offence to intercept communications in the course of their transmission
by means of a public postal service or a public or private telecommunication system without
lawful authority 1063. Sections 1(5) and 5 RIPL further clarify that to be lawful, any



1059
     Section 11 PPCE.
1060
     Section 14 PPCE.
1061
     According to Section 16 PPCE, the police officer who seizes anything must, if requested by the occupier of
premises, provide in reasonable time that person with a record of what he has seized. The police officer must
also grant access to or supply a photograph or a copy of the seized item at the request of the person who had
custody of the item before it was seized. There is no obligation to grant access or to supply a photograph or
photo if the officer in charge has reasonable ground for believing that to do so would prejudice the investigation,
the investigation of any other offence or any related criminal proceeding. Pursuant to Section 17 PPCE, anything
that has been seized by the police may be retained as long as is necessary in all the circumstances.
1062
     The RIPL is supplemented by a number of Codes of Practice dealing with the following matters: (1)
Accessing Communications Data, (2) Covert Human Intelligence Sources, (3) Covert Surveillance, (4)
Interception of Communications, and (5) Interception of Communications – Postal. The Codes of Practice
provide guidance on, amongst other things, the procedures to be followed before the interception of
communications or acquisition of communications data can take place. They were issued and brought into force
under Section 61(1) RIPL by the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Codes of Practice) (Bailiwick of
Guernsey) Order 2004. Pursuant to Section 62(1) RIPL the Codes of Practice are admissible in civil and criminal
proceedings. If any provision of the Codes of Practice appears relevant to a question before a court, it must be
taken into account.
1063
     The same applies to communications transmitted by means of a private telecommunication system, i.e. any
telecommunication system which, without itself being a public telecommunication system, is (1) attached,
directly or indirectly and whether or not for the purposes of the communication in question, to a public
telecommunication system, and (2) there is apparatus comprised in the system which is both located in the
Bailiwick and used (with or without other apparatus) for making the attachment to the public telecommunication
system.

                                                       139
interception of communications must be authorised by an interception warrant 1064 issued by
Her Majesty’s Procureur 1065.

An interception warrant is issued on application by certain persons specifically listed in the
law 1066 if the Procureur is satisfied that it is necessary for one of the purposes listed in Section
5(3) RIPL. These include the purpose of preventing or detecting serious crime1067.
Importantly, the law explicitly requires that the conduct that would be authorised must be
proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by that conduct 1068. In considering the
necessity and proportionality of the measure, the Procureur must take into account whether
any alternative means could be reasonably used to obtain the information 1069. In addition,
Section 2.5 of the Code of Practice on Interception of Communications further clarifies that
this requires a balance of the intrusiveness of the interference against the need for it in
operational terms. The interception of communications will not be proportionate if it is
excessive in the circumstances of the case. In addition, any interception should be carefully
managed to meet the objective in question and must not be arbitrary or unfair 1070.

In accordance with Section 7 RIPL, the warrant must either name or describe one person as
the interception subject or specify a single set of premises as the premise in relation to which
the interception is to take place. The warrant must also describe the communications for
which interception is authorised, including the addresses, numbers, apparatus or other factors
used to identify the communications 1071. An interception warrant ceases to have effect after 3
months beginning with the day of the warrant's issue, unless it is renewed. A renewal may be




1064
     Interception without warrant is only lawful in specific limited circumstances set out exhaustively in Sections
3 and 4 RIPL, for instance if the sender and the intended recipient of the communication have consented to the
interception, the interception is carried out by a provider of postal or telecommunication services and connected
to the purpose of providing that service, or if it is carried out for the purpose of obtaining information about the
communications of a person who is or is reasonably believed to be in a country or territory outside of Guernsey,
provided that the law of that country or territory requires the interceptor to carry out, secure or facilitate the
interception in question. Any interception conducted by public authorities under Sections 3 and 4 RIPL must be
done in accordance with the Human Rights (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law 2000 (in particular Article 8 of the
European Convention of Human Rights incorporated by that Law), the Data Protection Law and the LEO.
1065
      Pursuant to Section 67(3) RIPL, any reference to Her Majesty’s Procureur includes Her Majesty’s
Comptroller. The Procureur and Comptroller are independent from the government and are appointed by way of
Warrant under the hand of the Sovereign.
1066
      These are the Chief Officer of the Island Police Force, the Chief Officer of Customs and Excise (of
Guernsey), the Director General of the Security Service, the Chief of the Secret Intelligence service, the Director
of GCHQ, and a person who, for the purpose of any international mutual assistance agreement, is the competent
authority of a country or territory outside the Bailiwick.
1067
      Section 67(3) RIPL defines ‘serious crime’ as offences which involve the use of violence, result in
substantial financial gain or constitute conduct by a large number of persons in pursuit of a common purpose, or
for which a person over 21 with no previous convictions could reasonably be expected to be sentenced to
imprisonment for three years or more.
1068
     Section 5(2)(b) RIPL.
1069
     Section 5(4) RIPL.
1070
      Section 2.5, Interception of Communications Code of Practice (made pursuant to Section 61 of the
Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law, 2003, available at:
https://www.guernseylegalresources.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?documentid=52506.
1071
      Section 7(3) RIPL. Under Sections 7(4) and (5) RIPL, these specifications are not required for the
interception of ‘external communications’, i.e., communications sent or received outside the British Islands
where the Procureur has issued a certificate certifying that the examination of certain described intercepted
material is necessary. According to the Guernsey authorities, such certificate has never been issued.

                                                       140
authorised by Her Majesty’s Procureur only where (s)he is satisfied that the warrant remains
necessary for the purposes described in Section 5(3) RIPL 1072.

The RIPL also regulates the acquisition of communications data. The acquisition of
communications data is not aimed at obtaining the content of a communication, but aimed at
obtaining information such as traffic data, information about the use of a postal service or
telecommunications service, and any other information held or obtained by a postal
service/telecommunication service in relation to persons to whom the service is provided 1073.

Persons designated with respect to a specific public authority 1074 may obtain communications
data by giving notices to a postal or telecommunications operator, requiring the operator to
obtain and/or disclose relevant data 1075. A notice may only be issued if the designated person
believes that it is necessary to obtain communications data for one of the specific purposes
listed exhaustively in the law, including for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime or of
preventing disorder 1076.

Importantly, the notice or authorisation may only be granted if the designated person believes
that obtaining the data in question is proportionate to what is sought to be achieved 1077.
According to the Code of Practice on Accessing Communications Data, this means that even
if an action that interferes with a Convention right is directed at pursuing a legitimate aim, this
will not justify the interference if the means used to achieve the aim are excessive in the
circumstances 1078. Any interference with a Convention right must be carefully designed to
meet the objective in question and must not be arbitrary or unfair 1079. Even taking all these
considerations into account, in a specific case interference may still not be justified because
the impact on the individual or group is too severe 1080.

The notice must be issued in writing and specify the communications data to be obtained, the
grounds on which it is necessary to obtain the data, the office, rank or position held by the
person issuing the notice, and the manner in which any disclosure required by the notice is to

1072
     Section 8(1)-(3) RIPL.
1073
     ‘Communications data’ is defined in Section 67(3) RIPL.
1074
     In accordance with Section 20 RIPL, the designated persons are the Chief Officer of the Island Police Force
(for the Island Police Force), the Chief Officer of Customs and Excise (for Customs and Excise) and Her
Majesty’s Procureur (for any other public authority within Guernsey and any of the Intelligence Services).
1075
     Section 18 RIPL. Pursuant to Section 18(9) RIPL, such notices may include a requirement to keep secret the
issuing of the notice, its contents, and the measures carried out in pursuing the notice. The violation of this
provision is deemed to be an offence under Section 18(10) RIPL.
1076
     Pursuant to Section 18(2) RIPL, the notice or authorisation can also be issued if it is in the interests of the
economic well-being of the Bailiwick (as specified by the Code of Practice on Accessing Communications Data,
only to the extent relevant in the interest of national security), in the interests of public safety, for the purpose of
protecting public health, for the purpose of assessing or collecting any tax, duty, levy or other imposition,
contribution or charge payable to a government department, for the purpose, in an emergency, of preventing
death or injury or any damage to a person’s physical or mental health, or of mitigating any injury or damage to a
person’s physical or mental health, or for any other purpose which is specified by the responsible government
committee. The committee has specified two additional purposes for obtaining communications data: inquiry
into circumstances around a person’s death, and discharge of functions of the Guernsey Financial Services
Commission under any international agreement or memorandum of understanding endorsed by the International
Organisation of Securities Commission.
1077
     Section 18(5) RIPL.
1078
        Section 4.4 Code of Practice on Accessing Communications Data, available at:
https://www.guernseylegalresources.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?documentid=52505.
1079
     Section 4.4 Code of Practice on Accessing Communications Data.
1080
     Section 4.4 Code of Practice on Accessing Communications Data.

                                                         141
be carried out 1081. The effect of a notice is limited and unless it is renewed, it ceases to require
that data be obtained one month after the date on which the notice is given1082. A notice may
be renewed before the end of the period of one month under the same conditions as described
above 1083.

Finally, Part III RIPL covers the investigation of electronic data protected by encryption and
allows for the issuing of notices requiring the disclosure of the key to encrypted information
that is lawfully within the possession of the authorities (such as to obtain passwords allowing
access to electronic devices). Such notices may be given where any protected information has
come into possession of authorities 1084 and a person with the appropriate permission1085
reasonably believes that a key to the protected information is in the possession of a person and
that the imposition of a disclosure requirement in respect of the protected information is
necessary for one of the purposes listed exhaustively in the law, notably in the interest of
national security or for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime 1086. In addition, the
person imposing the disclosure requirement must believe on reasonable grounds that the
measure is proportionate to what is sought to be achieved and that it is not reasonably
practicable to obtain possession of the protected information in an intelligible form without
the disclosure requirement 1087. The notice must be given in writing or in a manner that
produces a record 1088 and must describe the protected information to which the notice relates,
must specify the office, rank or position held by the person giving it, must specify the time by
which the notice is to be complied with and must set out the disclosure that is required by the
notice and the form and manner in which it is to be made 1089.

In Guernsey, criminal law enforcement authorities can also obtain personal data from business
organisations in the context of investigations into whether a person has engaged in or
benefited from criminal conduct, or into the whereabouts of the proceeds of criminal conduct.

These powers are governed by the Criminal Justice (Proceeds of Crime (Bailiwick of
Guernsey) Law, 1999 (POCL). In addition, the Drug Trafficking (Bailiwick of Guernsey)
Law, 2000 (DTL) introduces similar powers in connection with investigations into whether a
person has carried on or has benefited from drug trafficking, the whereabouts of the proceeds
of drug trafficking, or drug money laundering.

In accordance with these laws, the Bailiff can, on an application of a police officer, make
orders to make material available, issue search warrants to obtain that material where a
1081
     Section 19(2) RIPL.
1082
     Section 19 (4) to (7) RIPL.
1083
     Section 19(6)-(7) RIPL. If the person who has given the notice is satisfied that it is no longer necessary on
these grounds or no longer proportionate to what is ought to be achieved, the person shall cancel the notice,
pursuant to Section 19(8) RIPL.
1084
     By any of the means listed in Section 46(1) RIPL, such as the exercise of a statutory power to seize, detain,
inspect, search or otherwise to interfere with documents or other property or the exercise of any statutory power
to intercept communications.
1085
     Pursuant to Schedule 2 RIPL, a person has the appropriate permission if a written permission for the giving
of Section 46 notices has been granted by a person holding judicial office, or when information has come to the
possession of the authorities by a conduct authorized by warrant and the warrant contained permission for the
giving of Section 46 notices in relation to protected information to be obtained under the warrant.
1086
     Section 46(2) and (3) RIPL.
1087
     Section 46(2)I and (d) RIPL.
1088
     Section 46(4)(a).
1089
     Section 46(4)(b) – (g).

                                                      142
production order is not appropriate or not complied with, make customer information orders
and account monitoring orders.

Each type of order is subject to strict formal and substantial requirements. In essence, the
scope of such orders is always limited to one individual or one set of premises, they must
contain specific mandatory information, and they may only be issued for limited purposes.

For instance, under the POCL, the Bailiff can make an order 1090 to make material available if
there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that a specified person has engaged in or
benefited from criminal conduct, there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that the material
is likely to be of substantial value to the investigation, and does not consist of or include items
subject to legal professional privilege or excluded material 1091, and there are reasonable
grounds for believing that it is in the public interest that the material should be produced or
that access to it should be given 1092.

The Bailiff can issue a search warrant 1093 under the POCL authorising a police officer to enter
and search specific premises, provided that the same conditions as described above are met
and an order to make material available has not been complied with, or it would not be
appropriate to make such an order. Where a police officer has entered premises in the
execution of a search warrant, he or she may seize and retain any material, other than items
subject to legal professional privilege or excluded material, which is likely to be of value to
the investigation. All applications for production orders and search warrants must have the
consent of Her Majesty's Procureur.

A customer information order requires a financial services business 1094, on a notice given by
Her Majesty’s Procureur or a police officer, to provide any customer information 1095 that the
institution has relating to a person specified in the application 1096, in such manner, and by
such time, as they require 1097. An account monitoring order requires the financial services
business specified in the application to provide account information specified in the order to

1090
     Section 45 POCL.
1091
     Excluded material includes personal records which a person has acquired or created in the course of any
trade, business profession or other occupation, human tissue taken for the purposes of diagnoses or medical
treatment and journalistic material.
1092
     In relation to any material that consists of information contained in a computer, such an order requires to
produce the material in a form in which it can be taken away and in which it is visible and legible, or to give
access to the material in a form in which it is visible and legible.
1093
     Section 46 POCL.
1094
     The financial services businesses are defined in Schedule 1 to the POCL and include for instance lending,
financial leasing, operating a money service business, currency exchange and cheque cashing, facilitating or
transmitting money or value through an informal money or value transfer system or network, issuing, redeeming,
managing or administering means of payment, including credit, charge and debit cards, cheques, travellers’
cheques, money orders and bankers’ drafts and electronic money, providing financial guarantees or
commitments, trading in money market instruments, foreign exchange, exchange, interest rate or index
instruments, and commodity futures, transferable securities or other negotiable instruments or financial assets,
participating in securities issues and the provision of financial services related to such issues, etc.
1095
     Customer information is defined in Section 48B POCL and section 67B DTL as information about whether
the person holds an account or safe deposit box at the financial services business and other relevant information
such as the account or safety box number, the person’s name, date of birth and address, the date on which the
person began to hold the account, if the person has ceased to hold the account the date of cessation, such
evidence of the person’s identity as was obtained by the financial services business under or for the purposes of
any legislation relating to money laundering etc.
1096
     Section 48A POCL and section 67A DTL.
1097
     Section 48A(6)POCL and section 67A(6) DTL.

                                                      143
an appropriate officer, for the period 1098, in a manner, and by the time stated in the order1099.
The conditions for issuing these orders are identical to the ones described above 1100.

Under the Disclosure (Bailiwick of Guernsey) Law, 2007 (DL) obligations are placed on
financial services businesses 1101 and other (non-financial services) businesses to disclose
certain information 1102 to a prescribed police officer, where they know or suspect, or have
reasonable grounds for knowing or suspecting, that another person is engaged in money
laundering or that certain property is or is derived from the proceeds of criminal conduct 1103.

Importantly, any disclosure of personal data obtained on the basis of the abovementioned
provisions has to comply with the Data Protection Law, and the further processing by criminal
law enforcement authorities of personal data obtained through such disclosures is subject to
the provisions of the LEO.

        2.2.2. Further use of the information collected

The further use of data collected by Guernsey criminal law enforcement authorities on one of
the grounds referred to in Section 2.2, as well as the sharing of such data with a different
authority for purposes other than the ones for which it was originally collected (so-called
‘onward sharing’), is subject to safeguards and limitations.

First, the processing of personal data by law enforcement authorities in Guernsey is governed
by the provisions of the LEO as described in section 2.1. With respect to onward sharing,
Article 6(2) of the LEO, like the Law Enforcement Directive, allows that personal data
collected for a law enforcement purpose may be further processed (whether by the original
controller or by another controller) for any other (secondary) law enforcement purpose if the
data subject has given its consent to the further processing, if the further processing is for a
historical or scientific purpose, or if the controller processes the data for the secondary
purpose in the context of discharging a function imposed by law, and the processing is
necessary and proportionate to that secondary purpose. In this case, all the safeguards
provided by the LEO and the Data Protection Law (referred to in section 2.1) apply to the
processing carried out by the receiving authority.

When law enforcement authorities in Guernsey intend to share personal data processed under
the LEO with law enforcement authorities of a third country, specific requirements apply1104.
These requirements are very similar to those set out by the Law Enforcement Directive.

1098
     The period stated in an account monitoring order must not exceed the period of 90 days beginning with the
day on which the order is made (Section 48H(7) POCL, 67H(7)DTL).
1099
     Section 48H(6) POCL, section 67H(6) DTL.
1100
     Such orders can also be made in connection of an investigation into money laundering or drug money
laundering, if there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that the person specified in the application for the
order has committed a money laundering offence or an offence under Section 57, 58 or 59 DTL, and the above-
mentioned conditions are met, see Sections 48C and 48(I) POCL, Sections 67C and 67I DTL.
1101
     See definition in Schedule 1 to the POCL, footnote 86.
1102
     The information that needs to be disclosed includes any information or document relating to the knowledge,
suspicion or reasonable grounds for suspicion that the person in respect of whom the disclosure is made is
engaged in money laundering or that certain property is or is derived from the proceeds of any person’s criminal
conduct, and any fact or matter upon which such knowledge, suspicion or reasonable grounds for suspicion is
based, see Section 3A DL.
1103
     Sections 1 and 3 DL.
1104
     Sections 43 to 47 LEO.

                                                     144
Transfers of personal data to “unauthorised jurisdictions” (essentially jurisdictions other than
the EU Member States and any country or international organisation that the European
Commission has found to ensure an adequate level of protection within the meaning of Article
36 of the LED) 1105 can only take place if they are necessary for a law enforcement purpose
and based on appropriate safeguards 1106. In the absence of appropriate safeguards, transfers to
unauthorised jurisdictions are only possible in specific circumstances that are listed in the law
in an exhaustive manner, e.g., for the protection of vital interests of individuals, to safeguard
legitimate interests of the data subject, to prevent immediate and serious threats to the public
or national security of any country, in individual cases for a law enforcement purpose, and in
individual cases in the context of legal proceedings and legal advice relating to a law
enforcement purpose 1107.

Second, the different laws that allow for data collection by criminal law enforcement
authorities in Guernsey impose specific limitations and safeguards as to the use and further
dissemination of the information obtained in exercising the powers they grant.

As regards the powers of search and seizure under the PPCE, the police officer who seizes
anything must, if requested by the occupier of premises, provide in reasonable time that
person with a record of what he has seized. The police officer must also grant access to or
supply a photograph or a copy of the seized or retained item at the request of the person who
had custody of the item before it was seized 1108. Importantly, anything that has been seized by
the police may not be retained longer than necessary in the circumstances 1109.

With respect to the interception of communications, Sections 12 and 13 RIPL set out the
safeguards that need to be applied to material intercepted on the basis of a warrant. In
particular, the Procureur must make arrangements to ensure that the dissemination of the
intercepted material (i.e., the number of people who can access it, the extent to which the
material is disclosed or copied, the number of copies 1110, etc.) is limited to the minimum
necessary for the purposes authorised by the warrant. Each copy made of any of the materials
must be destroyed as soon as there are no longer any grounds for retaining it as necessary for
any of the authorised purposes 1111. Intercepted material may be shared with authorities of a

1105
     Section 50 LEO.
1106
     Section 43(1) in conjunction with Section 44 LEO. Appropriate safeguards are in place where provided by a
legal instrument binding the intended recipient, such as a legally binding and enforceable agreement between the
controller and the recipient, or where the controller, having assessed all the circumstances surrounding the
transfer, concludes that appropriate safeguards exist to protect the data. The controller is required to keep
detailed written records of any transfer relying on appropriate safeguards, and when relying on appropriate
safeguards on the basis of the circumstances surrounding the transfer, the controller must notify the Authority of
the categories of data transferred on that basis.
1107
     Section 45 LEO.
1108
     Section 16 PPCE.
1109
     Section 17 PPCE.
1110
     ‘Copy’ is defined as (1) any copy, extract or summary of the material or data which identifies itself as the
product of an interception; or (2) any record referring to an interception which is a record of the identities of the
persons to or by whom the intercepted material was sent, or to whom the communications data relates.
1111
     Something is considered necessary for the authorised purposes if it continues to be necessary (or is likely to
become necessary) (1) for the purpose for which the warrant was issued; (2) for facilitating the carrying out of
any of the functions of the Attorney General in relation to interceptions; (3) for facilitating the carrying out of
any functions in relation to interceptions by the Commissioner or of the Tribunal; or (4) to ensure that a person
conducting a criminal prosecution has the information needed to determine what is required of that person by his
or her duty to secure the fairness of the prosecution.

                                                        145
country or territory outside of Guernsey only if the Procureur has made arrangements that
ensure corresponding limitations, to the extent that the Procureur seems fit, and that prevent
any disclosure that would not be lawful within Guernsey 1112.

These safeguards are further specified in the Codes of Practice on the Interception of
Communications. In particular, the Code of Practice requires all intercepted material to be
handled in accordance with the arrangements made by the Procureur, the details of which
must be made available to the Investigatory Powers Commissioner (see section 2.2.3
below) 1113. All intercepting agencies are required to keep detailed records of interception
warrants for which they have applied 1114. The Code further requires intercepted material, as
well as copies and summaries of the material, to be handled and stored securely to minimise
the risk of loss or theft. In particular, it must be inaccessible to persons without the required
level of security clearance, and this requirement for secure storage also applies to
communications service providers. It also requires intercepted material to be securely
destroyed as soon as it is no longer needed for any of the authorised purposes and retained
material to be reviewed at appropriate intervals to confirm that its retention is justified and
valid. 1115

Concerning the acquisition of Communications Data, the Code of Practice on Accessing
Communications Data provides that applications and notices for communications data must
be retained by the relevant public authority until they have been audited by the Investigatory
Powers Commissioner. The public authority should also keep a record of the dates on which
an authorisation or notice is started and cancelled. The Code furthermore provides that
communications data, as well as all copies, extracts and summaries of it, must be handled and
stored securely 1116.

For the investigation of electronic data protected by encryption, Section 51 RIPL sets out
additional safeguards. In particular, it requires all persons involved in such investigations to
make arrangements in order to ensure that any key disclosed in the context of the
investigation is used only for obtaining access to information to which the investigation
relates, that the use and retention of the key are proportionate to what is sought to be
achieved, that the key is stored in a secure manner and that it is destroyed as soon as it is no
longer needed 1117.

Finally, under the DL any information obtained by Her Majesty's Procureur or a police officer
under this law or any other enactment, or in connection with the carrying out any of their
respective functions, may be disclosed to any other person only if the disclosure takes place
for a specified purpose, notably for the prevention, detection, investigation or prosecution of
criminal offences, whether in Guernsey or elsewhere, the carrying out the functions of the
Guernsey Financial Services Commission or a body in another country or territory which
carries out any similar function to the Commission, or for the carrying out of any functions of


1112
     Section 12(6) and (7) RIPL.
1113
     Section 6.1, Interception of Communications Code of Practice.
1114
     Section 4.16, Interception of Communications Code of Practice.
1115
     Section 6.2 to 6.9, Interception of Communications Code of Practice.
1116
     Section 7, Accessing Communications Data Code of Practice.
1117
     Section 51 RIPL.

                                                      146
any intelligence service. Any such disclosure must not contravene the Data Protection Law or
LEO 1118.

        2.2.3. Oversight

Different bodies carry out oversight of the activities of criminal law enforcement authorities.

First, the processing of personal data by competent authorities for criminal law enforcement
purposes is subject to the oversight of the Data Protection Authority, whose independence is
enshrined in law 1119. The tasks and powers of the Data Protection Authority mirror those set
out in Article 46 and 47 of the LED 1120. To perform those tasks, the Data Protection Authority
may investigate complaints, conduct inquiries into the processing of personal data by criminal
law enforcement authorities 1121, issue recommendations, make a determination of a violation
of the Law and impose sanctions 1122. These sanctions can include reprimands, warnings or
corrective orders (e.g., requiring the authority to bring processing in compliance with the
Law, rectify or erase data, cease the processing, etc.). In determining which order to impose,
the Authority must have regard to different factors, such as the nature, gravity and duration of
the violation, whether the violation was intentional or negligent, the degree of cooperation
with the Authority to remedy the breach, any other action taken to mitigate any damage
suffered by data subjects etc. 1123.

According to information provided by the Data Protection Authority, since the entry into
force of the LEO, the Authority has been involved in 17 complaints, two inquiries and 11 self-
reported data breaches that concerned data processing carried out by law enforcement
authorities. The Authority issued one enforcement notice against a law enforcement authority
in a case that concerned the unlawful sharing of data. The notice required the authority to
review safeguarding and associated data sharing procedures. The Data Protection Authority
also regularly engaged with law enforcement authorities by providing guidance and advice.

Second, the use of investigatory powers under the RIPL is overseen by the Investigatory
Powers Commissioner. Under Part IV of the RIPL, the Bailiff must appoint a judge of the
Court of Appeal (of Guernsey) as the Investigatory Powers Commissioner. The
Commissioner is responsible for reviewing the activities under the RIPL, including the issuing
of interception warrants, notices for the collection of communications data and investigations
of electronic data protected by encryption 1124. All persons involved in the use of investigatory
powers are required to disclose or provide to the Commissioner all documents and
information that the Commissioner may require for the purpose of enabling him to carry out
his functions 1125. The Commissioner is in turn required to prepare an annual report on the use



1118
     Section 8(4)(a) DL.
1119
     Section 3(1)(f) LEO in conjunction with Section 62 Data Protection Law.
1120
     Section 3(1)(f) LEO in conjunction with Parts XI and XII Data Protection Law.
1121
     Section 3(1)(f) LEO in conjunction Sections 68 and 69 Data Protection Law.
1122
      Section 3(1)(f) LEO in conjunction Section 72 Data Protection Law. The Authority cannot impose
administrative fines on competent authorities processing personal data for criminal law enforcement purposes,
see Schedule 1 LEO.
1123
     Schedule 1 LEO, which modifies Section 73(7) and (7A) Data Protection Law.
1124
     Section 53 RIPL.
1125
     Section 54(1) RIPL.

                                                    147
of investigatory powers for submission to the Bailiff of Guernsey 1126. The Bailiff must lay
before the Royal Court a copy of every annual report made by the Commissioner 1127. The
Commissioner’s report is also made public. If it appears to the Commissioner that there has
been a contravention of the RIPL or insufficient safeguards have been put in place for
intercepted communications, he/she must report that to the Bailiff 1128.

As described in the Commissioner’s recent annual reports, the overwhelming majority of
warrants requested and granted in Guernsey are in support of the activities of the Guernsey
Police and the Guernsey Border Agency and for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime,
notably drug trafficking and related anti-money laundering. In his annual reports, the
Commissioner found that warrants had been issued for properly identified statutory purposes,
in respect of the principles of necessity and proportionality and in compliance with procedural
requirements. He also noted that the safeguards required by Sections 12 and 51 RIPL had
been implemented in a satisfactory manner. In a limited number of instances, the
Commissioner noted that he had made recommendations for further practical
improvements 1129.

        2.2.4. Redress

As regards the processing of personal data by law enforcement authorities in Guernsey,
redress mechanisms are available under the data protection legislation, under the Human
Rights Act 2001 and under the RIPL. This series of mechanisms provide data subjects with
effective administrative and judicial means of redress, enabling them in particular to ensure
their rights, including the right to have access to their personal data, or to obtain the
rectification or erasure of such data.

First, data subjects have the right to lodge a complaint with the Data Protection Authority
concerning the processing of their personal data by criminal law enforcement authorities1130.
The Authority has the power to determine breaches of the LEO and impose necessary
sanctions. It also has the power, on request by a data subject or on its own initiative, to bring
proceedings before a court in respect of any breach or anticipated breach of the Law.
Following such complaint, the court can make any order, relief and remedy it considers just


1126
     Section 54(4) RIPL.
1127
     Section 54(6) RIPL.
1128
     Section 54(2) and (3) RIPL.
1129
     The Reports of the Investigatory Powers Commissioner covering the years 2016 to 2021 are available at:
https://guernseyroyalcourt.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?id=154063&p=0,
https://guernseyroyalcourt.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?id=148330&p=0,
https://guernseyroyalcourt.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?id=148328&p=0,
https://guernseyroyalcourt.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?id=125594&p=0,
https://guernseyroyalcourt.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?id=115492&p=0,
https://guernseyroyalcourt.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?id=107429&p=0. In 2021, the Commissioner noted that a
more detailed confidential report had been provided that included recommendations on how to improve the
practice in relation to the acquisition of communications data, see para. 63 of the 2021 report. In 2020, the
Commissioner made recommendations in relation to the operation and management of covert human intelligence
sources, see para. 67 of the 2020 report. In 2019, recommendations concerned the authorisation of direct
surveillance, see para. 76 of the 2019 report. In 2018, the Commissioner recommended measures to improve the
quality of applications for interception warrants, see para. 57 of the 2018 report. In 2017, recommendations for
practical improvement concerned direct surveillance and covert human intelligence sources, see paras. 64 and 67
of the 2017 report.
1130
     Section 3(1)(f) LEO in conjunction with Section 67 Data Protection Law.

                                                     148
under the circumstances, including an award of compensation to any person who suffers
damage as a result of the breach, an injunction or interim injunction to restrain any actual or
anticipated breach of an operative provision, and a declaration that a breach was
committed 1131.

Second, individuals can obtain judicial redress against decisions of the Authority. This
includes the possibility to challenge an action or inaction of the Authority before a court, e.g.,
decisions not to investigate a complaint, or decisions finding that there has been no violation
of the Law. Moreover, an individual can appeal to court against any failure of the Authority to
provide written notice that a complaint is either being investigated or not being investigated,
within the time period specified in the Law, or if the complaint is being investigated, written
notice of the progress and, where applicable, the outcome of the investigation within the time
period specified in the Law 1132. If a determination of the Authority is appealed, the court has
the power to confirm or annul the determination of the Authority and remit the matter back to
the Authority for reconsideration and make any other order it considers just 1133.

Third, under Section 79 of the Data Protection Law, individuals can also obtain judicial
redress against criminal law enforcement authorities directly before the courts. In particular, if
there is a breach of the operative provisions of the Law and the breach causes damage to
another person, it is actionable in court by that person 1134.

Fourth, as far as any person considers that their rights, including rights to privacy and data
protection, have been violated by public authorities, individuals can obtain redress before the
Guernsey courts under the Human Rights Law 2001. Under Section 6(1) of the Human Rights
Law, it is unlawful for a public authority to act in a way which is incompatible with rights
provided in the law 1135. A person who claims that a public authority has acted (or proposes to
act) in a way which is unlawful under Section 6(1) can bring proceedings against the authority
under this Law in the appropriate court or tribunal, when he or she is (or would be) a victim of
the unlawful act 1136. If the court finds any act of a public authority to be unlawful, it can grant
such relief or remedy, or make such order, within its powers as it considers just and
appropriate 1137.

Finally, any individual may obtain judicial redress before the European Court of Human
Rights against the unlawful collection of his/her data by criminal law enforcement authorities,
provided that all available domestic remedies have been exhausted.



1131
     Section 3(1)(f) in conjunction with Section 85 Data Protection Law.
1132
     Section 3(1)(f) in conjunction with Section 82 Data Protection Law.
1133
     Section 3(1)(f) in conjunction with Section 83 Data Protection Law.
1134
     Section 3(1)(f) in conjunction with Section 79(2) Data Protection Law.
1135
     However, the act of the public authority is not unlawful if as the result of one or more provisions of primary
legislation, the authority could not have acted differently or in the case of one or more provisions of, or made
under, primary legislation which cannot be read or given effect in a way which is compatible with the
Convention rights, the authority was acting so as to give effect to or enforce those provisions, see Section 6(2)
Human Rights Law.
1136
     Section 7(1) Human Rights Law. According to Section 7(5) Human Rights Law a person is a victim of an
unlawful act only if he would be a victim for the purposes of Article 34 of the Convention if proceedings were
brought in the European Court of Human Rights in respect of that act.
1137
     Section 8(1) Human Rights Law.

                                                       149
For violations of the RIPL, individuals can obtain redress before the Interception of
Communications Tribunal. This redress avenue is described in section 2.3.4 below.

       2.3. Access and use by Guernsey public authorities for national security purposes

In Guernsey, access to information transferred under the adequacy decision for purposes of
national security can take place in the form of the interception of communications, the
acquisition of communications data and the investigation of data protected by encryption on
the basis of the RIPL 1138.

          2.3.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

The interception of communications, acquisition of communications data and investigation of
data protected by encryption on the basis of the RIPL may not only take place in the context
of criminal investigations, but also when necessary in the interests of national security or to
safeguard the economic well-being of the Bailiwick 1139. The use of these powers for those
purposes is subject to the same substantive and procedural limitations and safeguards as
described in section 2.2.1 in the context of criminal law enforcement, notably the need for
independent authorisation, requirements of necessity and proportionality and limitation to
specific communications or information 1140.

Moreover, although the notion of “economic well-being” may appear broad, Section 5 RIPL
sets out that an interception warrant can only be considered necessary for the purpose of
safeguarding the economic well-being of Guernsey if the purpose is to obtain information
relating to the acts or intentions of persons outside Guernsey 1141. In addition, the Code of
Practice on the Interception of Communications further specifies that Her Majesty's Procureur
can only issue an interception warrant for the purpose of safeguarding the economic well-
being of Guernsey if he considers, on the basis of the facts of each case, that there is a direct
link between the economic well-being of the Bailiwick and national security 1142. Similarly,
the Code of Practice on Accessing Communications Data sets out that communications data


1138
     These powers can be exercised by the Island Police Force, Customs and Excise (of Guernsey), and the UK
intelligence services. The safeguards under the RIPL apply also to any UK authorities making use of powers
under the RIPL, notably the requirements for the issuing and implementation of interception warrants,
restrictions on the use and disclosure of intercepted material, and the right of complaint to the Tribunal. The
Human Rights Law, the Data Protection Law and the LEO also apply to any actions taken and decisions made by
UK authorities acting under the RIPL. In addition, any safeguards and limitations in UK law (including
legislation governing intelligence services or data protection) apply concurrently to the UK authorities. For the
powers that can be exercised in Guernsey by UK intelligence services and the limitations and safeguards
provided by UK law, see the Commission Implementing Decision of 28.6.2021 pursuant to Regulation (EU)
2016/679 on the adequate protection of personal data by the United Kingdom, available at:
https://commission.europa.eu/system/files/2021-
06/decision_on_the_adequate_protection_of_personal_data_by_the_united_kingdom_-
_general_data_protection_regulation_en.pdf.
1139
     Sections 5(3)(a) and (c), 18(2)(a) and (c) and 46(3)(a) and (c) RIPL.
1140
     Differently from what is described in Section 2.2.1, when relating to the interception of communications in
the interest of national security or the safeguarding of Guernsey’s economic well-being, a warrant can be
renewed for up to six months, see Section 8(4) RIPL.
1141
     Section 5(5) RIPL.
1142
     Section 5.4 Interception of Communications Code of Practice. An example of a situation where it might be
possible to rely on this ground to authorise an interception would be a threat to Guernsey’s critical national
infrastructure that would impact Guernsey’s economic interests (e.g., through an attack on Guernsey’s essential
electricity or communications infrastructure).

                                                      150
can only be obtained for the purpose of the economic well-being of Guernsey if, on the basis
of the facts of each case, the economic well-being is related to national security 1143.

         2.3.2. Further use of the information collected

The further use of personal data obtained in the interests of national security is governed
either by the provisions of the LEO or of the Data Protection Law, as described in section
2.1 1144. Section 6(2) of the LEO allows that personal data collected for a law enforcement
purpose (within the meaning of the LEO) may be further processed for any other (secondary)
law enforcement purpose only if the data subject has given its consent to the further
processing, if the further processing is for a historical or scientific purpose, or if the controller
processes the data for the secondary purpose in the context of discharging a function imposed
by law, and the processing is necessary and proportionate to that secondary purpose. Pursuant
to Sections 5and 6(1)(b) of the LEO, data processing must be lawful and fair, and data must
not be further processed in a manner that is incompatible with the purpose for which it was
collected.

Moreover, specific requirements apply when personal data is shared with authorities outside
of Guernsey 1145. As described in more detail in sections 1.1, 2.1 and 2.2.2, these requirements
are very similar to those set out by the EU’s data protection framework. Transfers of personal
data to “unauthorised jurisdictions” (essentially jurisdictions other than the EU Member States
and any country or international organisation that the European Commission has found to
ensure an adequate level of protection) 1146 can only take place if they are based on appropriate
safeguards 1147. In the absence of appropriate safeguards, transfers to unauthorised
jurisdictions are only possible in specific circumstances that are listed in the law in an
exhaustive manner 1148.

In addition, the RIPL, complemented by the relevant Codes of Practice, sets out specific
safeguards for the further use and sharing of data obtained on the basis of its provisions.
These involve particular arrangements to ensure that the dissemination of material obtained is
limited to the minimum necessary for the purposes pursued with the authorisation. Material
must be handled and stored securely to minimise the risk of loss or theft and must be
destroyed as soon as there are no longer any grounds for retaining it as necessary for any of
the authorised purposes. Retained material must be reviewed at appropriate intervals to
confirm that its retention is justified and valid. All agencies exercising powers on the basis of
the RIPL are required to keep detailed records of warrants or authorisations for which they
have applied 1149. Intercepted material may be shared with authorities of a country or territory

1143
     Section 4.2 Accessing Communications Data Code of Practice.
1144
     The LEO applies to the processing of personal data by a competent authority, including for the purpose of
safeguarding against or preventing threats to national security. The Data Protection Law applies if the processing
of personal data for national security purposes is not carried out by a competent authority. While both the LEO
and the Data Protection Law provide for an exemption from specified provisions for national security purposes,
these provisions may only be restricted if necessary and proportionate and to the extent that their application
would be likely to prejudice national security.
1145
     Sections 43 to 47 LEO, Sections 55 to 59 Data Protection Law.
1146
     Section 50 LEO, Section 111(1) Data Protection Law.
1147
     Section 43(1) in conjunction with Section 44 LEO, Section 56 Data Protection Law.
1148
     Section 45 LEO, Section 59(1) Data Protection Law.
1149
     Sections 12, 13 and 51 RIPL, Section 4.16, Interception of Communications Code of Practice, Section 7,
Accessing Communications Data Code of Practice.

                                                      151
outside of Guernsey only if arrangements are in place to ensure corresponding limitations and
to prevent any disclosure that would not be lawful within Guernsey 1150.

        2.3.3. Oversight

Government access for national security purposes in Guernsey is overseen by different bodies.
The Data Protection Authority oversees the processing of personal data in light of the LEO
and the Data Protection Law, while specific oversight on the use of the investigatory powers
under the RIPL is provided by the Investigatory Powers Commissioner.

The processing of personal data carried out for national security purposes is governed by the
provisions of both the LEO and the Data Protection Law. The general functions and powers of
the Guernsey Data Protection Authority are laid down in Section 61 et seq. of the Data
Protection Law in conjunction with Schedule 7 to the Data Protection Law 1151. The tasks
include, but are not limited to, monitoring and enforcement, promoting public awareness,
advising the Guernsey parliament and government and other institutions on legislative and
administrative measures, promote the awareness of controllers and processors of their
obligations, provide information to a data subject concerning the exercise of the data subject’s
rights, handle complaints, conduct investigations, issue guidance etc. The Authority has the
powers to notify controllers of an alleged infringement and to issue warnings that a processing
is likely to infringe the rules, issue reprimands, ban processing or order the controller to take
certain actions 1152. While the Data Protection Law 1153 allows exemptions from certain
provisions, including from those that concern the Authority, for national security purposes,
these provisions may only be restricted on a case-by-case basis to the extent that their
application would be likely to prejudice national security and if necessary and proportionate
(as explained in section 2.1).

Furthermore, as described in section 2.2.3 above, the Investigatory Powers Commissioner
oversees the application of the RIPL i.e., the interception of communications, the acquisition
of communications data and the investigation of data protected by encryption. In his recent
annual reports, the Commissioner noted that the overwhelming majority of warrants in
Guernsey were requested and granted in support of the activities of the Guernsey Police and
the Guernsey Border Agency and for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime 1154.

        2.3.4. Redress




1150
     Section 12(6) and (7) RIPL, see also section 2.2.2 above.
1151
     Pursuant to Section 3(1)(f) LEO, the provisions regarding the Authority in the Data Protection Law apply
also to processing of personal data that falls within the scope of the LEO.
1152
     Sections 72 and 73 Data Protection Law.
1153
     Pursuant to paragraph 18 of Schedule 8 Data Protection Law, the application of the provisions in Parts II to
XII and XV may be restricted, provided that the applicable conditions are fulfilled.
1154
     The Reports of the Investigatory Powers Commissioner covering the years 2016 to 2021 are available at:
https://guernseyroyalcourt.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?id=154063&p=0,
https://guernseyroyalcourt.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?id=148330&p=0,
https://guernseyroyalcourt.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?id=148328&p=0,
https://guernseyroyalcourt.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?id=125594&p=0,
https://guernseyroyalcourt.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?id=115492&p=0,
https://guernseyroyalcourt.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?id=107429&p=0.

                                                      152
First, an individual who believes that his or her rights under the LEO have been (or are about
to be) breached can make a complaint to the Data Protection Authority, which exercises
oversight over processing by competent authorities (as described in section 2.3.3 above).
Redress mechanisms under the LEO and the Data Protection Law include breach
determinations or sanctions issued by the Authority, and civil proceedings before a court, in
which a court can make any order, relief and remedy it considers just under the circumstances,
including an award of compensation to any person who suffers damage as a result of the
breach, an injunction or interim injunction to restrain any actual or anticipated breach of an
operative provision, and a declaration that a breach was committed (as described in section
2.2.4 above).

Individuals can also obtain redress for violations of the RIPL before an independent Tribunal
established by Section 56 RIPL 1155.

The Tribunal is the appropriate forum for any complaint by a person, including any individual
in the EU, who believesthat conduct under the RIPL has taken place in relation to him, his
property or his communications 1156, including conduct by or on behalf of any of the UK
intelligence services, conduct in connection with the interception of communications in the
course of their transmission, conduct in connection with the collection of communications
data, or conduct in connection with the investigation of data protected by encryption 1157. In
addition, the complainant is required to believe that the conduct has taken place either in
“challengeable circumstances” 1158 or has been carried out by or on behalf of the intelligence
services 1159.

When considering a complaint, it is the duty of the Tribunal to investigate whether
surveillance has taken place in relation to the complainant, as well as the authority for such
surveillance, if any 1160. The Tribunal determines whether any errors of law, errors of fact or
procedural errors have been committed, or whether there has been any other irregularity, such
as a lack of proportionality 1161. All persons involved in the exercise of powers under the RIPL

1155
     In accordance with Schedule 3 to the RIPL, the Tribunal consists of five members appointed by the Royal
Court of Guernsey, each of whom must be (1) an Advocate of the Royal Court of Guernsey or Jersey, (2) a
member of the Bar in England, Scotland or Northern Ireland, or (3) a solicitor of the Supreme Court of
Judicature of England and Wales, a solicitor in Scotland or a solicitor of the Supreme Court of Northern Ireland,
in each case of not less than ten years standing. The members are appointed for a term of 5 years and can be
reappointed. A member of the Tribunal may only be removed from office by the Royal Court.
1156
     On the standard of the ‘belief’ test, in the absence of relevant case law in Guernsey, UK case law is likely to
be persuasive. In Human Rights Watch v Secretary of State [2016] UKIPTrib15_165-CH, paragraph 41, the
Investigatory Powers Tribunal, by referring to the European Court of Human Rights case law, held that the
appropriate test is whether in respect of the asserted belief that any conduct falling within Subsection 68(5) of
RIPA 2000 has been carried out by or on behalf of any of the intelligence services, there is any basis for such
belief, such that the individual may claim to be a victim of a violation occasioned by the mere existence of secret
measures or legislation permitting secret measures, only if he is able to show that due to his personal situation,
he is potentially at risk of being subjected to such measures.
1157
     Section 56(4)(a) RIPL.
1158
     Pursuant to Section 56(7) and (8) RIPL, conduct has taken place in ‘challengeable circumstances’ if it has
taken place with authority (e.g., on the basis of an interception warrant, an authorisation/notice for the
acquisition of communications data, etc.), or if the circumstances are such that it would not have been
appropriate for the conduct to take place without authority, or at least without proper consideration having been
given to whether such authority should be sought.
1159
     Section 56(4)(b) RIPL.
1160
     Section 58 RIPL.
1161
     Section 58(2) and (3) RIPL.

                                                       153
are required to provide to the Tribunal all such documents and information that the Tribunal
may need to carry out its functions 1162. The Tribunal also has the power to require the
Investigatory Powers Commissioner to provide the Tribunal with all such assistance
(including the Commissioner's opinion as to any issue to be determined by the Tribunal) as
the Tribunal think fit 1163. The Commissioner must be kept informed about the proceedings
and any determination, award, order, or other decision made in relation to those
proceedings 1164.

If the Tribunal makes a determination in favour of the complainant, the Tribunal must provide
the complainant with a summary of that determination including any findings of fact. The
tribunal must also give notice to the complainant if no determination has been made in his/her
favour 1165. The Tribunal has the power to issue interim orders and to provide any such award
of compensation or other order as it thinks fit. This may include an order quashing or
cancelling any warrant or authorisation and an order requiring the destruction of any records
of information obtained in exercise of any power conferred by a warrant or authorisation, or
otherwise held by any public authority in relation to any person 1166. According to Section
58(8) RIPL, a determination, award, order, or other decision of the Tribunal, is not subject to
appeal 1167.

Finally, as also described in section 2.2.4 above, as far as individuals consider that their
rights, including rights to privacy and data protection, have been violated by public
authorities, they can obtain redress before the Guernsey courts under the Human Rights Law
2001. In addition, any individual may obtain judicial redress before the European Court of
Human Rights against the unlawful collection of his/her data for national security purposes,
provided that all available domestic remedies have been exhausted.




1162
     Section 59(6) and (7) RIPL.
1163
     Section 59(2) RIPL.
1164
     Section 59(3) RIPL.
1165
     Section 59(4) RIPL.
1166
     Section 58(7) RIPL.
1167
     According to the Guernsey authorities, the Tribunal has so far made a determination in the case of one
complaint. The decision of the Tribunal was not made public. Pursuant to Rule 6(1) of the Investigatory Powers
Tribunal       Rules       2006       adopted       under       Section      60      RIPL        (available        at:
http://www.guernseylegalresources.gg/CHttpHandler.ashx?id=70618&p=0) the Tribunal has a duty to ensure,
amongst other things, that no information is disclosed which is contrary to the public interest or prejudicial to the
prevention, detection, investigation or prosecution of serious crime.

                                                        154
                                            VI. ISLE OF MAN

1. RULES APPLYING TO THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA

       1.1. Relevant developments in the data protection framework of the Isle of Man

On 28 April 2004 the Commission adopted a decision in which the Isle of Man was
considered as providing an adequate level of protection for personal data transferred from the
EU 1168. The Article 29 Working Party had adopted a positive opinion on the level of
protection of personal data in the Isle of Man on 21 November 2003 1169. At the time, the legal
framework for the protection of personal data in the Isle of Man was set out in the Data
Protection Act 2002, which entered into force on 1 April 2003. The Data Protection Act 2002
was closely aligned with the UK’s Data Protection Act 1998 that had been enacted in the UK
to give effect to the provisions of Directive 95/46/EC (Data Protection Directive) 1170.

Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, the Isle of Man has further modernised and
significantly strengthened its data protection framework through a comprehensive reform. The
Data Protection Act 2002 was replaced with new legislation that closely aligns the Isle of Man
regime with the EU’s current data protection legislation. In particular, the Isle of Man has
incorporated most of the provisions of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR) 1171 into its own
legal order while making only minor adjustments on specific aspects, in particular to adapt the
framework to the local context. The recitals of the GDPR have also been maintained in the
new data protection framework to assist with contextualising and interpreting relevant
provisions.

The Isle of Man main data protection framework now consists of:

       (1) the Data Protection Act 2018, which enables the Isle of Man to apply EU instruments
           relating to data protection (including, but not limited to the GDPR, Directive (EU)
           2016/680 (Law Enforcement Directive) 1172, Directive (EU) 2016/681 (PNR
           Directive) 1173 and Directive (EU) 2016/1148 (NIS Directive 1174) as part of the law of
           the Isle of Man 1175;



1168
     Commission Decision 2004/411/EC of 28 April 2004 on the adequate protection of personal data in the Isle
of Man, OJ L 151, 30.04.2004, p. 48-51.
1169
     Opinion 6/2003 on the level of protection of personal data in the Isle of Man (WP82), available at:
https://ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2003/wp82_en.pdf.
1170
     Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data.
1171
     Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).
1172
     Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of the
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties,
and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA.
1173
     Directive (EU) 2016/681 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the use of
passenger name record (PNR) data for the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of terrorist
offences and serious crime.
1174
     Directive (EU) 2016/1148 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 July 2016 concerning
measures for a high common level of security of network and information systems across the Union.
1175
     The Data Protection Act 2018 entered into force on 15 May 2018.

                                                      155
       (2) the Data Protection (Application of GDPR) Order 2018 1176 and Data Protection
           (Application of LED) Order 2018 1177 (Applied GDPR and Applied LED,
           respectively) 1178, which stipulate that the GDPR and the Law Enforcement Directive
           apply as part of the law of the Isle of Man, subject to the modifications laid down in
           those orders; and finally

       (3) the GDPR and LED Implementing Regulations 2018 (Implementing Regulations),
           which provide supplementing provisions for the implementation of both of the above-
           mentioned orders 1179.

More specifically, the Applied GDPR retains the broad scope of application of the GDPR1180.
Like the GDPR, the Applied GDPR covers the processing of personal data wholly or partly by
automated means, or other processing, if the personal data forms part of a filing system 1181.
Moreover, the GDPR’s definitions of ‘personal data,’ ‘processing’ 1182, ‘pseudonymisation’
‘controller’ and ‘processor’ have been retained without modifications in the Applied GDPR.
Concerning its territorial scope, the Applied GDPR covers the processing of personal data by
controllers or processors established in the Isle of Man 1183, under identical conditions to those
set out in Article 3 of the GDPR. It has also been extended to cover the processing of personal
data by controllers or processors not established in the Isle of Man, subject to the same



1176
     The Order was amended by Data Protection (application of GDPR) (Amendment) Order 2019 that came into
force on 20 November 2019.
1177
     The Order was amended by Data Protection (application of LED) (Amendment) Order 2019 that came into
force on 20 November 2019.
1178
     The Applied GDPR and the Applied LED came into force on 16 May 2018.
1179
     The GDPR and LED Implementing Regulations 2018 came into force on 1 August 2018. They were
amended by the GDPR and LED Implementing Regulations (Amendment) Regulations 2018 which entered into
force on 1 February 2019.
1180
     Like the GDPR, the Applied GDPR does not apply to the processing of personal data by a natural person in
the course of a purely personal or household activity (Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Article 2(2)I
GDPR). In addition, the processing of personal data solely for journalistic, artistic, academic and literary
purposes is exempt from several provisions of the Applied GDPR and the Implementing Regulations (the data
protection principles, legal grounds for processing, the transparency obligations, rights of the data subjects,
obligation to notify data breaches and the rules on international transfers). This exception applies, to the extent
that the controller reasonably believes that the application of those provisions would be incompatible with such
purposes, where the processing is carried out with a view to the publication of journalistic, academic, artistic or
literary material and the controller reasonably believes that the publication of the material would be in the public
interest (Paragraph 22 of Schedule 9 of the Implementing Regulations). In determining whether an exception to
the Applied GDPR and the implementing Regulations would be justified, because the publication of personal
data would be in the public interest, the controller must take into account the special importance of the public
interest to preserve freedom of expression and information. Moreover, the controller must have regard to any of
the codes of practice or guidelines that is relevant to the publication in question (e.g., The Editors’ Code of
Practice and the National Union of Journalists Code of Conduct.
1181
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Article 2(1) GDPR.
1182
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Article 4(2) Applied GDPR. The Implementing Regulations
extend the scope of application of part of the Isle of Man’s data protection legislation (See Reg. 19 Implementing
Regulation), (including the Applied GDPR, the Applied LED and the Implementing Regulations) to the manual
and unstructured processing of personal data held by certain public authorities. Such public authorities are
defined in the Freedom of Information Act 2015 and include the Cabinet Office and the government
departments, Isle of Man constabulary, Statutory boards (for example Office of Fair Trading, Isle of Man
Financial Services Authority, Isle of Man Post Office and Communications Commission), publicly-owned
companies (such as Isle of Man Film Ltd and Isle of Man National Transport Ltd), other public authorities (such
as Attorney General’s Chambers, Clerk of Tynwald and Financial Intelligence Unit) and all local authorities.
1183
     Article 3 and Article 3(2) of Schedule 1 to the Applied GDPR in conjunction with Article 3(1) GDPR.

                                                       156
conditions that are set out in Article 3(2) of the GDPR; thereby strengthening the
effectiveness of the Isle of Man data protection regime 1184.

The Data Protection Act 2002 already contained the data protection principles that were set
out in the Data Protection Directive. The Applied GDPR retains those principles – namely,
the principles of lawfulness and fairness 1185; transparency 1186; purpose limitation1187; data
minimisation, accuracy and storage limitation 1188; security, integrity and confidentiality1189
and accountability 1190. At the same time, it further strengthens several principles by
introducing concrete obligations to implement them. In particular, the Applied GDPR
introduces the obligation to notify data breaches subject to the same conditions as in the
GDPR 1191, and reinforces accountability requirements by establishing obligations such as
record keeping, data protection by design and default, data protection impact assessments and
data protection officers 1192.

The Applied GDPR also guarantees the same data subject rights as enshrined in the GDPR,
i.e., the rights of information, access, rectification, erasure, restriction, objection, and
portability 1193. The provisions establishing these rights have been retained without changes.
Concerning the specific rights to object to direct marketing 1194, and not to be subject to
automated individual decision-making 1195, Isle of Man law now also fully mirrors the GDPR.

As is the case in the GDPR, the data subject rights in the Isle of Man are subject to certain
restrictions 1196 intended to allow the balancing of the data protection interests of individuals


1184
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Article 3(2) GDPR.
1185
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Articles 5(1)(a) and 6(1) GDPR. Reg. 10 of the Implementing
Regulations complements Article 6(1)I GDPR by providing that the processing of personal data under Article
6(1)I GDPR includes processing of personal data that is necessary for the administration of justice, the exercise
of a function of Tynwald, the exercise of a function conferred on a person by an enactment or the exercise of a
function of the Crown, a department or a Statutory Board. With respect to consent (one of the grounds for lawful
processing), the Applied GDPR also retains the conditions provided in the Article 7 GDPR, unmodified. In the
context of the provision of information society services pursuant to Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with
Article 8 GDPR, a child’s consent is lawful only when the child is at least 13 years old or, where the child is
below that age, the processing is lawful only if that consent is given or authorised by the holder of parental
responsibility.
1186
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Articles 13 and 14 GDPR.
1187
     The purpose limitation principle provided in Article 5(1)(b) GDPR has been retained without changes in the
Applied GDPR. The conditions on further compatible processing in Article 6(4)(a) – I GDPR have also been
retained with no modifications in the Applied GDPR.
1188
     The Applied GDPR does not introduce any changes on the principles of data minimisation, accuracy and
storage limitation (as provided in Article 5I – I GDPR).
1189
     Concerning data security, the principle of integrity and confidentiality (Article 5(f) GDPR) is retained in the
Applied GDPR without any modifications.
1190
     The principle of accountability provided in Article 5(2) GDPR has been retained in the Applied GDPR
without modifications and the same applies to Article 24 on the responsibility of the controller.
1191
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Articles 33 and 34 GDPR.
1192
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Articles 25, 30 35, 36 and 37 – 39 GDPR.
1193
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Articles 13 – 20 GDPR.
1194
     Article 21 GDPR on the data subject’s right to object has been retained in the Applied GDPR with no
modifications.
1195
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Article 22 GDPR. Reg. 16 of the Implementing Regulations
adds that when automated decision-making is required or authorised by law, the controller must, as soon as
reasonably practicable, notify the data subject in writing that such a decision has been taken. The data subject
has a right to obtain a reconsideration of the decision, or to a new decision not based solely on automated
processing.
1196
     The restrictions are set out in Schedule 9 to the Implementing Regulations.

                                                       157
with objectives of general public interest and with the fundamental rights and freedoms of
others.

Some of those allow the restriction of individual rights based on the nature of the personal
data being processed. They apply automatically whenever one of the listed categories of
personal data is being processed. These categories are listed in an exhaustive manner and
cover a narrowly construed set of situations, such as data processing for the purpose of
assessing a person’s suitability for certain specific offices (e.g., judicial appointments or
appointment made by the Crown) 1197, the processing of personal data for purposes of
providing confidential references 1198 or where personal data consists in marks or other
information processed for the purpose of determining the result of an exam 1199. These
categories are not only (very) limited in scope, but also do not typically cover situations
where personal data is transferred to the Isle of Man from the EU.

The majority of the restrictions have to be based either on grounds of prejudice or can only be
invoked to the extent that the application of a certain right would interfere with a protected
interest at stake, i.e., a public interest or the rights and freedoms of others. Restrictions subject
to the prejudice test can be invoked only when (and to the extent that) the application of the
provisions “would be likely to prejudice” the legitimate aim pursued. For example, controllers
can restrict data subject rights to the extent that their application would be likely to prejudice
the prevention or detection of crime or the assessment or collection of any tax or duty 1200, or
would be likely to prejudice the combat effectiveness of any of the armed forces of the
Crown 1201.

The Isle of Man Information Commissioner, as well as the Attorney General’s Chambers
together with the Cabinet Office, have issued interpretative guidance that clearly frames the
application of the exemptions. It clarifies the scope of the different exemptions, including by
means of concrete examples, which should help preventing that they are misunderstood and
applied in an overly broad manner. It also explains how the requirements of necessity and
proportionality should be applied with respect, in general, to the “likely to prejudice” or “to
the extent” standard, and for specific exemptions 1202. Finally, and importantly, the guidance

1197
     Paragraph 11 and 12 of Schedule 9 to the Implementing Regulations.
1198
     Paragraph 17 of Schedule 9 to the Implementing Regulations.
1199
     Paragraph 18 of Schedule 9 to the Implementing Regulations.
1200
     Paragraph 1(1) of Schedule 9 to the Implementing Regulations.
1201
     Paragraph 14 of Schedule 9 to the Implementing Regulations.
1202
     The guidance is available at: https://www.inforights.im/media/1972/appended-restrictions-exemptions.pdf.
First, it clarifies that “[…] the general obligation in respect of rights is to facilitate the exercise of those rights”
and that “the application of any restriction/exemption must be considered on a case-by-case basis as departure
from the general requirements to comply with rights and principle is only to the minimum extent necessary” (pp.
1 and 9). In this context, the type of personal data, the purpose of the processing and any adverse consequences
of the application of the exemption on the data subject must be taken into account (p. 9). Second, it clarifies that
decisions on restrictions should be taken at a senior level, the reasons for the decisions should be documented
and, where appropriate, explained to the data subject (pp. 3 and 9). Third, with respect to the exemptions that
apply “to the extent” that their application would be “likely to prejudice” or otherwise interfere with a protected
interest, the guidance clarifies that “the determination of the “extent” is a question of fact to be decided in the
light of all the circumstances of each specific case”. In this respect, the interference with the rights conferred on
the data subject must be proportionate to the reality as well as the potential gravity of the public interests
involved (see R (on the Application of Lord) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWHC
2073). The ‘likely to prejudice’ test implies that there is a substantial probability (rather than a mere risk) that
complying with the provision would noticeably damage” one or more of the protected interests at stake (p. 3). In

                                                         158
explicitly states that it should be read in conjunction with the Guidelines 10/2020 on
restrictions under Article 23 of the GDPR that have been issued by the EDPB 1203.

The current Isle of Man regime for special categories of personal data is similar to that of the
GDPR. The Applied GDPR recognises as special categories of data all data revealing racial or
ethnic origin, political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, trade-union membership,
genetic and biometric data, and data concerning a natural person’s sex life or sexual
orientation. The processing of such data is prohibited unless specific exceptions apply, which
correspond to those in the GDPR 1204. Moreover, the processing of special categories of data is
subject to additional requirements, in particular the obligation to appoint a data protection
officer in case of large-scale processing 1205 and to conduct a data protection impact
assessment 1206. Finally, the Applied GDPR retains without modification the GDPR’s
prohibition on automated individual decision-making on the basis of special categories of
data 1207.

In the field of international transfers of personal data, the legal framework of the Isle of Man
is closely aligned with Chapter V of the GDPR and therefore ensures continuity of protection
for the onward transfer of personal data that was originally received from the EU. In
particular, the Applied GDPR incorporates Chapter V of the GDPR into the Isle of Man legal
framework with certain adaptations to the local context (e.g., by deleting references to binding
corporate rules and to procedures before the EDPB) 1208 and is complemented by the
Implementing Regulations, which further specify under which conditions international data
transfers can take place. Transfers of personal data to third countries or international
organisations are prohibited except if the country or international organisation benefits from
an adequacy decision, if appropriate safeguards that meet the requirements of Article 46 of the
GDPR are in place, or if one of the derogations set out in the Implementing Regulations
apply 1209.

With respect to adequacy, the Applied GDPR and Implementing Regulations refer to
decisions adopted by the European Commission1210. As a result, controllers and processors in
the Isle of Man can transfer personal data freely, without having to put in place specific
safeguards, to all countries and territories for which the Commission has adopted an adequacy
finding. Appropriate safeguards may be provided by a legally binding and enforceable
instrument between public authorities or bodies, standard contractual clauses, an approved



particular, “the degree of risk must be such that there may be very well be prejudice to those interests even if the
risk falls short of being more probable than not” (p. 11).
1203
     https://www.inforights.im/media/1972/appended-restrictions-exemptions.pdf, p. 1.
1204
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Article 9 GDPR. In this respect, the Implementing Regulations
(Reg. 12 in conjunction with Schedule 2) further specify in which situations it is possible to rely on the ground
that allows the processing of special categories of data for reasons of substantial public interest. This includes
where the processing is necessary for the purposes of protecting a natural person from neglect or physical,
mental or emotional harm; for an insurance purpose or for the purposes of preventing fraud.
1205
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Article 37(1)I GDPR.
1206
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Article 35(3)(b) e GDPR.
1207
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Article 22(4) GDPR.
1208
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Articles 44 to 49 GDPR.
1209
     Reg. 68 and 69 Implementing Regulations.
1210
      See Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Article 45 GDPR and the following link:
https://inforights.im/organisations/data-protection-law-2018/transfers-to-third-countries.

                                                       159
code of conduct or an approved certification scheme 1211. The Information Commissioner has
so far not issued specific standard contractual clauses but has instead directed controllers and
processors to use the standard contractual clauses adopted by the European Commission1212.
Moreover, subject to prior authorisation by the Information Commissioner, an international
transfer can be carried out on the basis of ad hoc contractual clauses or administrative
arrangements between public authorities 1213. Finally, in specific situations (i.e., as an
exception to the general rule that an adequacy decision or appropriate safeguards should be in
place), data transfers may take place on the basis of one of the grounds listed in the
Implementing Regulations 1214. These ‘derogations/exceptions’ correspond to those of Article
49 GDPR, while providing for certain specifications as regards the situations in which they
may apply 1215.

       1.2. Oversight, enforcement and redress

Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, oversight and enforcement of compliance with
the Isle of Man data protection law have been strengthened, notably by reinforcing the
supervisory authority’s independence and by extending its powers.

Oversight and enforcement of the Applied GDPR and the Implementing Regulations are now
carried out by the Information Commissioner, whose appointment and powers are governed
by the Freedom of Information Act 2015. The Commissioner is explicitly mandated to
perform his or her functions and powers independently and, in doing so, not to be subject to
the direction of Tynwald (the Isle of Man parliament), its Branches or the Council of
Ministers 1216. The Commissioner is appointed by the Council of Ministers for a term of up to
5 years. Only candidates with appropriate qualifications, skills and competence can be
appointed 1217, and the candidate has to be approved by Tynwald 1218. The Information
Commissioner may be removed before the end of his or her term only for very specific
reasons set out in law1219, and the Freedom of Information Act covers cases where the office
may become vacant 1220.


1211
      Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Article 46(2) GDPR.
1212
     https://inforights.im/organisations/data-protection-law-2018/transfers-to-third-countries/.
1213
       According to Reg. 69 Implementing Regulations, in determining whether to authorise a transfer, the
Information Commissioner must have regard to factors that include, but are not limited to, any opinions or
decisions of the European Data Protection Board under Article 64, 65 or 66 GDPR that appear to the Information
Commissioner to be relevant.
1214
      Schedule 10 of the Implementing Regulations.
1215
      For example, para. 1 of Schedule 10 of the Implementing Regulations provides that a transfer may take place
where specifically required by a judgment of a court or tribunal having the force of law in the Isle of Man; para.
5 clarifies that a transfer may take place where “necessary for reasons of substantial public interest”, which will
be considered to be the case if the transfer is permitted or required under an enactment applicable in the Isle of
Man; and para. 7 explains that a transfer may take place if necessary to protect the vital interests of an individual,
if the data subject is physically or legally incapable of giving consent or has unreasonably withheld consent, or
the controller or processor cannot reasonably be expected to obtain the explicit consent.
1216
      Section 53 Freedom of Information Act.
1217
      According to Paragraph 3 of Schedule 2 of the Freedom of Information Act, the Information Commissioner
holds office for a term of up to five years and is automatically eligible for re-appointment for a second term of up
to 5 years on expiry of the first term. The Commissioner can be further appointed for a third term of up to 5
years if the Council of Ministers is satisfied that it is in the public interest to do so.
1218
      Schedule 2 Freedom of Information Act 2015.
1219
      If the person holding the office of Information Commissioner (1) has not carried out the duties of the office
in a competent manner; (2) is incapacitated either mentally or physically from carrying out the duties of the

                                                        160
The functions and powers of the Information Commissioner have been aligned with those of
supervisory authorities under the GDPR. In particular, the Information Commissioner may
issue enforcement and penalty notices for violations of provisions of the Applied GDPR and
Implementing Regulations on data protection principles, lawfulness of processing,
transparency and individual rights, obligations for controllers and processors and the rules on
international transfers, or for non-compliance with an information notice, an assessment
notice or an enforcement notice 1221. The Information Commissioner also has the power to
bring proceedings before a court in respect of a failure to comply with its notices and order
compliance 1222. Certain violations of data protection legislation may also constitute offences
and lead to criminal sanctions such as fines, imprisonment, or both 1223. This would for
example be the case when information is altered or erased with the intention of preventing
disclosure of information that any person has requested to access, or with the intention of
preventing the controller or processor from supplying the information requested by the
Information Commissioner 1224.

Avenues for redress for violations of the Applied GDPR and the Implementing Regulations
are available to data subjects under the same conditions as those provided by the GDPR1225.
In essence, data subjects have a right to an effective judicial remedy both before courts and
before the Information Commissioner. The Data Protection Tribunal is the competent forum
to hear appeals against decisions from the Information Commissioner 1226. Obtaining judicial
redress directly before the Data Protection Tribunal against controllers and processors 1227 is
also possible, under the cause of action of breach of statutory duty (i.e., for violations of a
data subjects’ right).

Taking into account of the size of the territory for which it has jurisdiction, the office of the
Information Commissioner has been active in exercising its different functions. For example,
in 2021, the Information Commissioner received 112 personal data breach reports and 44

office; (3) has neglected to carry out all or any of the duties of the office; (4) has failed to comply with the
restrictions on other employment and professional activity; (5) has failed to comply with any term or condition
of the appointment; (6) has engaged in conduct incompatible with the office of Information Commissioner; (7)
has taken leave of absence not provided for by the terms and conditions of the appointment; or (8) has been
convicted of an offence and by reason of that conviction shown himself not to be a fit and proper person to
continue to hold the office. See Paragraph 7 of Schedule 2 Freedom of Information Act.
1220
     Namely, if the person holding the office (1) dies; (2) gives the Chief Minister written notice of resignation;
(3) accepts nomination to become a member of Tynwald; (4) is compulsorily detained as a patient in a hospital;
(5) has a receiver appointed in respect of his or her property; (6) becomes bankrupt or makes a composition or
arrangement with his or her creditors; (7) is convicted of an offence involving corruption; or (8) is convicted of
an offence and sentenced to custody. See Paragraph 8 of Schedule 2 Freedom of Information Act.
1221
     According to Reg. 112(1) Implementing Regulations, the penalty notice requires the person to pay to the
Information Commissioner an amount specified in the notice. In determining whether to give a penalty notice to
a person and determining the amount of the penalty, the Information Commissioner must have regard to the
matters listed in Article 83(1) and (2) GDPR, that have been retained without modifications in Reg. 112(2) of the
Implementing Regulations. Under Reg. 114(1) of the Implementing Regulations, the maximum amount of the
penalty that may be imposed by a penalty notice is £1 000 000.
1222
     Reg. 117 Implementing Regulations.
1223
     Reg. 126 to 129 Implementing Regulations.
1224
     Reg. 128 and 129 Implementing Regulations.
1225
     The Applied GDPR retains the rules in Article 77 to 79 GDPR without material modifications.
1226
     According to Reg. 120 of the Implementing Regulations, the Data Protection Tribunal is an independent
judicial body established under the provisions of the Data Protection Act 2002 and is maintained under Reg. 119
Implementing Regulations.
1227
     Article 3 Applied GDPR in conjunction with Article 79 GDPR and Reg. 124 of the Implementing
Regulations.

                                                       161
complaints, engaged in four investigations and issued three information notices, five
reprimands, and three enforcement notices. In 2022, it handled 225 breach reports and 32
complaints, carried out seven investigations and issued two information notices, three
warnings, one reprimand, three enforcement notices and one penalty notice 1228.

Moreover, the Information Commissioner has issued several guidance documents for
organisations, for instance concerning specific categories of controllers (such as churches,
religious organisations or small businesses), specific processing activities (e.g., in the context
of cloud computing services), or on specific obligations (e.g., on carrying out data protection
impact assessments) 1229. To facilitate the exercise of rights by individuals, the Information
Commissioner has also developed dedicated guidance and template letters (e.g., for
submitting access requests) 1230, as well as an online tool for submitting complaints to the
Information Commissioner 1231.

2. ACCESS TO AND USE OF PERSONAL DATA TRANSFERRED FROM THE
   EUROPEAN UNION BY PUBLIC AUTHORITIES IN THE ISLE OF MAN

       2.1. General legal framework

The limitations and safeguards that apply to the collection and subsequent use of personal
data for purposes of criminal law enforcement and national security follow from the Isle of
Man’s international obligations in the area of fundamental rights and personal data protection,
from the rules that apply to the processing of personal data by the public sector, as well as
from specific laws regulating access to data by Isle of Man public authorities.

First, the right to the protection of personal data forms part of the right to respect for private
and family life enshrined in the Human Rights Act 2001, which incorporates into Isle of Man
law the rights stemming from the European Convention of Human Rights 1232. According to
the Human Rights Act 2001, all actions of public authorities must be in compliance with the
Convention 1233, and all primary and subordinate legislation shall be read and given effect in a
way that is compatible with the Convention’s rights 1234. Article 8 of the Convention provides
that any interference with privacy must be in accordance with the law, in the interests of one
of the aims set out in Article 8(2) and proportionate in light of that aim. Article 8 also requires
that the interference is “foreseeable”, i.e., have a clear, accessible basis in law, and that the
law contains appropriate safeguards to prevent abuse.

1228
     See the periodic reports for 2019 to 2023 available at: https://inforights.im/organisations/about-us/functions-
of-the-commissioner/compliance-activity/. On the issuing of a penalty notice, see also the Information
Commissioner’s         press    statement,    available      at:      https://inforights.im/organisations/latest-news-
updates/2022/aug/penalty-imposed-on-manx-care/.
1229
       Available at the following link: https://www.inforights.im/document-library/data-protection-law-
2018/?Page=1&.
1230
      https://www.inforights.im/individuals/data-protection/how-to-exercise-your-rights/making-a-subject-access-
request/.
1231
      Available at: https://www.inforights.im/complaint-handling/how-to-make-a-complaint-to-the-information-
commissioner/data-protection-complaints/.
1232
     The ratification of the European Convention of Human Rights by the United Kingdom has been extended to
the Isle of Man since 1953, see Declaration contained in a letter from the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, dated 23 October 1953, available at: https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-
list?module=declarations-by-treaty&numSte=005&codeNature=4&codePays=UK.
1233
     Section 6 Human Rights Act 2001.
1234
     Section 3 Human Rights Act 2001.

                                                        162
In addition, in its case law 1235, the European Court of Human Rights has specified that any
interference with the right to privacy and data protection should be subject to an effective,
independent and impartial oversight system that must be provided for either by a judge or by
another independent body 1236 (e.g., an administrative authority or a parliamentary body).
Moreover, individuals must be provided with an effective remedy, and the European Court of
Human Rights has clarified that the remedy must be offered by an independent and impartial
body which has adopted its own rules of procedure, consisting of members that must hold or
have held high judicial office or be experienced lawyers, and that there must be no evidential
burden to be overcome in order to lodge an application with it. In undertaking its examination
of complaints by individuals, the independent and impartial body should have access to all
relevant information, including closed materials. Finally, it should have the powers to remedy
non-compliance 1237.

Second, the Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to
Automatic Processing of Personal Data (Convention 108) applies to the Isle of Man by virtue
of the United Kingdom’s membership to this convention 1238. Article 9 of Convention 108
provides that derogations from the general data protection principles (Article 5 Quality of
data), the rules governing special categories of data (Article 6 Special categories of data) and
data subject rights (Article 8 Additional safeguards to the data subject) are only permissible
when such derogation is provided for by the law of the Party and constitutes a necessary
measure in a democratic society in the interests of protecting State security, public safety, the
monetary interests of the State or the suppression of criminal offences, or for protecting the
data subject or the rights and freedoms of others.

Therefore, through adherence to the European Convention of Human Rights and submission
to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights, the Isle of Man is subject to a
number of obligations, enshrined in international law, that frame its system of government
access on the basis of principles, safeguards and individual rights similar to those guaranteed
under EU law and applicable to the Member States.

Third, the processing of personal data by criminal law enforcement authorities in the Isle of
Man is subject to the rules of the Applied LED, which essentially replicates the Law
Enforcement Directive. The material scope of the Applied LED is identical to the one of the
Law Enforcement Directive. It applies to the processing of personal data by competent
authorities 1239 for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of

1235
     According to Section 2(1)(a) Human Rights Act 2001, a court or tribunal determining a question which has
arisen under this Act in connection with a Convention right must take into account any judgment, decision,
declaration or advisory opinion of the European Court of Human Rights.
1236
     European Court of Human Rights, Klass and others v. Germany, Application no. 5029/71, paragraphs 17-51.
1237
     European Court of Human Rights, Kennedy v. the United Kingdom, Application no. 26839/05, (Kennedy),
paragraphs 167 and 190.
1238
     See Declaration contained in a letter from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, dated 13
January 1993, registered at the Secretariat General on 21 January 1993, available at:
https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list?module=declarations-by-treaty&numSte=108&codeNature=0.
1239
     Competent authorities in the Isle of Man are listed in Schedule 1 to the Implementing Regulations and
include the Chief Constable of the Isle of Man Constabulary and any other police force established by the
Department of Home Affairs pursuant to section 1 of the Police Act 1993, and the Financial Intelligence Unit
established pursuant to the Financial Intelligence Unit Act 2016. Moreover, Regulation 28 of the Implementing
Regulations extends the LED’s scope to any other person, to the extent that the person has statutory functions for
any of the law enforcement purposes.

                                                      163
criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against
and the prevention of threats to public security 1240. Furthermore, the data protection principles
of lawfulness and fairness, purpose limitation, data minimisation, accuracy, storage limitation
and security are retained in the Applied LED in the exact same terms as in the LED 1241. In
essence, the processing of personal data by a competent authority is only permitted when
necessary for a law enforcement purpose, and only in accordance with a law specifying at
least the objectives of the processing, the personal data to be processed, and the purposes of
the processing 1242. In addition, the Applied LED imposes specific transparency obligations1243
and recognises the same data subject rights as the Law Enforcement Directive without any
modifications 1244. In particular, data subjects enjoy a right to access 1245, correction1246 and
deletion 1247 and have the right not to be subject to automated decision-making 1248. Competent
authorities are also required to implement data protection by design and default 1249, to keep
records of processing activities 1250, and, for certain processing operations, to carry out data
protection impact assessments and to pre-consult the Information Commissioner1251.
Moreover, they are required to put in place appropriate measures to ensure security of
processing 1252 and are subject to specific obligations in case of a data breach, including
notification of such breaches to the Information Commissioner and data subjects 1253. Like in
the Law Enforcement Directive, there is also a requirement for a controller (unless it is a court
or other judicial authority acting in a judicial capacity) to designate a data protection officer
who assists the controller in complying with its obligations as well as monitoring that
compliance 1254. Finally, the Applied LED contains specific provisions on international

1240
     Article 1(1) Applied LED; Regulation 29 and 27 Implementing Regulation.
1241
     Article 4(1) Applied LED.
1242
     Article 8 Applied LED. Pursuant to Article 10 Applied LED, stricter conditions apply to the processing of
special category data and it is permitted only where it is strictly necessary and the processing is authorised by the
law of the Island, the processing is for the purpose of protecting the vital interests of the data subject or of
another natural person or the processing relates to data which are manifestly made public by the data subject.
Additional conditions are set out in the Schedule 12 (e.g., the information was made public by the data subject;
processing is necessary for the purposes of preventing fraud, processing is necessary when a court or other
judicial authority is acting in its judicial capacity; legal proceedings; obtaining legal advice; etc.).
1243
     Article 13 Applied LED.
1244
     Similarly to Article 12 Law Enforcement Directive, Regulation 41 of the Implementing Regulations further
specifies the modalities for exercising these rights, allowing competent authority to charge a reasonable fee or
refuse to comply with a request from an individual if the request is manifestly unfounded or excessive, in
particular because of its repetitive character. Moreover, pursuant to Regulations 44 and 45(6) Implementing
Regulations, the Isle of Man Council of Ministers can by regulations (which require Tynwald approval) restrict,
wholly or partly, the data subject’s rights of access and the controllers obligation to inform the data subject in
writing about any refusal of the right to rectification or erasure, “to the extent that, and for so long as such a
partial or complete restriction constitutes a necessary and proportionate measure in a democratic society with due
regard for the fundamental rights and legitimate interests of the natural person concerned, in order to (1) avoid
obstructing official or legal inquiries, investigations or procedures; (2) avoid prejudicing the prevention,
detection, investigation or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties; (3) protect
public security; (4) protect national security; or (5) protect the rights and freedoms of others.” To date, no such
regulations have been adopted.
1245
     Article 14 Applied LED.
1246
     Article 16(1) Applied LED.
1247
     Article 16(2) Applied LED.
1248
     Article 11 Applied LED.
1249
     Article 20 Applied LED.
1250
     Article 24 Applied LED.
1251
     Articles 27 and 28 Applied LED.
1252
     Article 29 Applied LED.
1253
     Articles 30 and 31 Applied LED.
1254
     Article 32 Applied LED.

                                                        164
transfers of personal data to a third country or an international organisation 1255. The
provisions substantially echo those in the Law Enforcement Directive. Essentially, transfers
are prohibited unless the receiving country benefits from an adequacy decision by the
European Commission, or if appropriate safeguards are in place 1256. Transfers are still
possible in the absence of an adequacy decision or appropriate safeguards, but only in specific
circumstances listed in an exhaustive manner and identical to those set forth in the LED 1257.

Under identical conditions as under the Law Enforcement Directive, the Implementing
Regulations specify that certain specific provisions of the Applied LED1258 may be restricted
to the extent that the application of those provisions would be likely to prejudice any of the
matters mentioned in Article 1(1) of the Applied LED (i.e., the prevention, investigation,
detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including
the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security) 1259.

The Isle of Man Information Commissioner and the Attorney General’s Chambers and
Cabinet Office have clarified through guidance how the law enforcement exemption functions
in practice 1260. Importantly, the guidance stresses that the exemptions must not be applied in a
blanket manner, but “on a case-by-case basis”, i.e., where necessary and proportionate for law
enforcement purposes in light of all the circumstances of the specific case. Finally, in the
absence of specific judicial authority in the Isle of Man, the guidance refers to the case law of
the High Court of England and Wales where it has been held that the term “likely” connotes a
degree of probability where there is a very significant and weighty chance of prejudice to the
identified public interests 1261.

The processing of personal data for national security purposes in the Isle of Man is subject to
the provisions of the Applied GDPR and the Implementing Regulations that are described in
section 1 above 1262. At the same time, Regulation 22 of the Implementing Regulations


1255
     Articles 35 to 39 Applied LED.
1256
     Regulation 72 of the Implementation Regulations provides that appropriate safeguards are in place where
provided by a legally binding instrument, or where the controller, having assessed all the circumstances
surrounding transfers of personal data, concludes that appropriate safeguards exist to protect the data.
1257
     Regulation 73 sets out the derogations for specific situations in which international transfers can take place
in the absence of an adequacy decision or of appropriate safeguards, that is for the protection of the vital interests
of individuals, to safeguard the legitimate interests of the data subject, to prevent an immediate and serious threat
to public security, in individual cases for a law enforcement purpose, and in an individual case for the
establishment, exercise or defence of legal claims relating to any law enforcement purpose.
1258
     The provisions that can be restricted are the following: (1) Article 4(1)(a), except to the extent to which the
processing requires compliance with Article 8 Applied LED; (2) Article 13 and regulation 42 (information to be
made available or given to the data subject); (3) Article 14 and regulation 43 (right of access by the data subject);
(4) Article 16 and regulation 45 (right to rectification or erasure and restriction of processing); (5) Article 18 and
regulation 47 (rights of the data subject in criminal investigations and proceedings).
1259
     Paragraph 30, Part 8 of Schedule 9 Implementing Regulations. When invoking an exemption to the right of
access, the controller is required to document the factual or legal reasons on which the decision to rely on the
exemption was based, and to make that information available to the Manx Information Commissioner, see
Paragraph 30(3) of Schedule 9 Implementing Regulations.
1260
     Information Commissioner’s Guidance on “Exemptions from certain provisions,” Appendix “Further
guidance produced by the Attorney General’s Chamber’s and Isle of Man Cabinet Office,” available at:
https://www.inforights.im/media/1972/appended-restrictions-exemptions.pdf.
1261
     Information Commissioner’s Guidance on “Exemptions from certain provisions,” Appendix “Further
guidance produced by the Attorney General’s Chamber’s and Isle of Man Cabinet Office,” pp. 16-18.
1262
     Compared to the GDPR, the scope of the Applied GDPR has been modified by omitting the exclusions in
Article 2(2)(a) GDPR (processing in the course of activities which fall outside the scope of Union law) and

                                                        165
provides for an exemption from specified provisions of the Applied GDPR and the
Implementing Regulations 1263 when such exemption is required for the purpose of
safeguarding national security or for defence purposes. The application of this exemption has
been clarified through detailed guidance by the Isle of Man Information Commissioner and
the Attorney General’s Chambers and Cabinet Office 1264. In particular, relying on the
exemption must be necessary and proportionate in a democratic society. The exemption
cannot be invoked in a blanket manner but can be relied upon only the basis of a case-by-case
analysis and considering the actual consequences of applying the relevant provision of the
Applied GDPR. Controllers must be able to show that there is a real possibility of an adverse
effect on national security if the relevant provision is applied. All decisions to rely on an
exemption have to be documented and controllers must be prepared to share that
documentation with the Information Commissioner 1265.

Moreover, according to Regulation 23 of the Implementing Regulations, controllers may
apply for a certificate signed by the Chief Minister which certifies that the restriction of the
specific provisions listed under Regulation 22 is required to the protection of national security.
It is important to note that the national security certificates do not provide for an additional
ground for restricting data protection rights for national security reasons. In other words, the
controller or processor can only rely on a certificate when it has concluded it is necessary to
rely on the national security exemption which, as explained above, must be applied on a case-
by-case basis 1266. Even if a national security certificate applies to the matter in question, the
Isle of Man Information Commissioner can investigate whether or not reliance on the national
security exemption was justified in a specific case 1267.

Any person directly affected by the issuing of the certificate may appeal to the Isle of Man
Data Protection Tribunal 1268 against the certificate 1269 or, where the certificate identifies data

Article 2(2)(b) GDPR (processing by the Member States when carrying out activities which fall within the scope
of Chapter 2 of Title V of the TEU).
1263
     According to Regulation 22 Implementing Regulations, the application of the following provisions may be
restricted: (1) Chapter II Applied GDPR (data protection principles), except the principle of lawfulness and the
legal grounds for the processing under Article 6 (lawfulness of processing) and Article 9 (processing of special
category data); (2) Chapter III Applied GDPR (rights of data subjects); (3) in Chapter IV Applied GDPR Article
33 (notification of personal data breach to the Information Commissioner) and Article 34 (communication of
personal data breach to the data subject); (4) Chapter V Applied GDPR (transfers of personal data to third
countries of international organisations); (5) in Chapter VI Applied GDPR Article 57(1)(a) and (6) (Information
Commissioner’s duties to monitor and enforce the Applied GDPR and to conduct investigations) and Article 58
(investigative, corrective, authorisation and advisory powers of Information Commissioner); (7) Chapter VIII
Applied GDPR (remedies, liabilities and penalties) except for Article 83 (general conditions for imposing
administrative fines) and Article 84 (penalties); (8) in Part 6 Implementation Regulation, regulation 84 (general
functions of the Information Commissioner), paragraphs (3) and (8); and regulation 84, paragraph (9), so far as it
relates to Article 58(2)(i) Applied GDPR.
1264
      Information Commissioner’s Guidance on “Exemptions from certain provisions,” Appendix “Further
guidance produced by the Attorney General’s Chamber’s and Isle of Man Cabinet Office”.
1265
      Information Commissioner’s Guidance on “Exemptions from certain provisions,” Appendix “Further
guidance produced by the Attorney General’s Chamber’s and Isle of Man Cabinet Office,” pp. 9 and 13-15.
1266
      Information Commissioner’s Guidance on “Exemptions from certain provisions,” Appendix “Further
guidance produced by the Attorney General’s Chamber’s and Isle of Man Cabinet Office,” pp. 15-16.
1267
     Article 5(2) Applied GDPR requires the controller to be in a position to demonstrate that it has complied
with the DPA 2018. This implies that an intelligence service would need to demonstrate to the ICO that when
relying on the exemption, it has considered the specific circumstances of the case.
1268
     In accordance with Regulation 119 of the Implementing Regulations, there continues to be an Isle of Man
Data Protection Tribunal which consists of a chairperson and two other members, appointed in accordance with
the Tribunals Act 2006.

                                                      166
by means of a general description, challenge the application of the certificate to specific
data 1270. The tribunal will review the decision to issue a certificate and decide whether there
were reasonable grounds for issuing the certificate. It can consider a wide range of issues,
including necessity, proportionality and lawfulness, having regard to the impact on the rights
of data subjects and balancing the need to safeguard national security. As a result, the tribunal
can quash the certificate or determine that the certificate does not apply to specific personal
data which is the subject of the appeal 1271.

It follows from the above that limitations and conditions are in place under the applicable Isle
of Man legal provisions, as interpreted by the Isle of Man government and the Isle of Man
Information Commissioner, to ensure that these exemptions and restrictions remain within the
boundaries of what is necessary and proportionate to protect criminal law enforcement and
national security.

       2.2. Access and use by Isle of Man public authorities for criminal law enforcement
            purposes

In the Isle of Man, criminal law enforcement functions are carried out by the police force,
officially called the Isle of Man Constabulary, which is headed by the Chief Constable. In the
specific case of financial crime, the responsible authority is the Financial Intelligence Unit
(FIU) 1272. The law of the Isle of Man imposes a number of limitations on the access to and use
of personal data for criminal law enforcement purposes, and it provides oversight and redress
mechanisms in this area. The conditions under which access to personal data can take place
and the safeguards applicable to the use of these powers are assessed in the following
sections.

          2.2.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

Personal data transferred under the adequacy decision and processed by organisations in the
Isle of Man may be obtained by Isle of Man criminal law enforcement authorities by means of
investigative measures under the Police Powers and Procedures Act 1998, on the basis of the
Interception of Communications Act 1988, or on the basis of anti-money laundering and anti-
terrorist (financing) legislation, including through (voluntary) disclosures.

The Police Powers and Procedures Act 1998 (PPP Act) provides the Isle of Man police with a
legal basis for accessing personal data held by commercial operators through searches and
seizures. The PPA Act lays down detailed rules on the scope and application of these
measures, aimed at ensuring that the interference with the rights of individuals will be limited
to what is necessary for a specific criminal investigation and proportionate to the pursued
purpose. Searches and seizures may only take place on the basis of a court-issued search


1269
     Regulation 23(3) Implementing Regulations.
1270
     Regulation 23(5) Implementing Regulations.
1271
     Regulation 23(4) and (7) Implementing Regulations.
1272
     The Financial Intelligence Unit is an autonomous agency in the Isle of Man competent for gathering
financial intelligence on the Isle of Man. More specifically, the FIU is responsible for (1) receiving, gathering,
analysing, storing and sharing information about financial crime (whether in the Island or elsewhere); (2)
assisting with the prevention and detection of crime, and in particular, financial crime; (3) cooperating with law
enforcement agencies; and (4) contributing to the reduction of crime, and in particular, financial crime and to the
mitigation of its consequences, see Section 5 FIUA.

                                                       167
warrant 1273 and the issuing of such warrant is subject to specific procedural and substantive
requirements.

More specifically, a police officer must apply for a search warrant to a Justice of the
Peace 1274. An application for a warrant must set out the grounds for the application, the legal
basis for issuing the warrant and, as far as practicable, the persons and premises 1275 to be
searched 1276. In case the application would request authorisation for more than one search
entry, it should also indicate the maximum number of entries desired 1277.

A search warrant may be issued only if the Justice of the Peace is satisfied that: (1) a serious
offence 1278 has been committed and there is material on the premises to be searched which is
likely to be of substantial value to the investigation of the offence, or a person has in his
possession any property in respect of which an offence has been committed; (2) the material
or the property is likely to be relevant evidence; and (3) it does not consist of excluded
material or items subject to legal privilege 1279.

In terms of formal requirements, the warrant must specify the name of the person who applies
for it, the date of issuance, the enactment under which it is issued, and the particular premises
to be searched, or (in the case of an all-premises warrant) the person who is in occupation or
control of the premises to be searched, together with any premises under that person’s


1273
      Pursuant to Sections 20 and 21 PPP Act, warrantless searches may only take place in exceptional
circumstances that do not appear relevant in the context of data transfers covered by an adequacy decision
adopted under the GDPR. In particular, a police officer may search premises for the purpose of (1) executing a
warrant of arrest or a warrant of commitment; (2) arresting a person for an offence triable on information; (3)
recapturing any person who is unlawfully at large and whom he is pursuing; or (4) saving life or limb or
preventing serious damage to property. In addition, a warrantless search may take place of any premises
occupied or controlled by a person under arrest, if the police officer has reasonable grounds to suspect that there
is evidence, other than items subject to legal privilege, on the premises that relates to that offence, or a
connected/similar offence.
1274
     In the Manx justice system, ‘Justices of the Peace’ are magistrates, appointed by the Lieutenant Governor on
behalf of the Crown, who have judicial powers in the Isle of Man Courts.
1275
     The warrant can apply to one or more sets of premises occupied or controlled by a person specified in the
application (specific premises warrant) or any premises occupied or controlled by a person specified in the
application (all premises warrant). If the application is for an all premises warrant, it must specify (1) as many
sets of premises desired to enter and search as it is reasonably practicable to specify; (2) the person who is in
occupation or control of those premises; (3) why it is necessary to search more premises; and (4) why it is not
reasonably practicable to specify all the premises desired to enter and search. The Justice of the Peace must also
be satisfied that, because of the particulars of the offence, there are reasonable grounds for believing that it is
necessary to search premises occupied or controlled by the person in question and not specified in the application
in order to find the material sought, and that it is not reasonably practicable to specify in the application all the
premises that might need to be searched.
1276
     Section 18(2) PPP Act.
1277
     The warrant may authorise entry to and search of premises more than once if the Justice of the Peace is
satisfied that it is necessary to authorise multiple entries in order to achieve the purpose for which the warrant is
issued. If it authorises multiple entries, the number of entries authorised may be unlimited or limited to a
maximum (sections 1C and 1D PPP Act).
1278
     Serious offences are defined in Section 79 PPP Act in conjunction with Schedule 3 to the PPP Act and
include offences such as treason, murder, manslaughter, rape, possession of firearms with intent to injure etc.
1279
     Section 11(1) PPP Act. In addition, pursuant to Section 11(3) PPP Act, one of the following conditions must
be met in relation to each set of premises specified in the application: (1) it is not practicable to communicate
with any person entitled to grant entry to the premises; (2) it is practicable to communicate with a person entitled
to grant entry to the premises but it is not practicable to communicate with any person entitled to grant access to
the evidence; (3) entry to the premises will not be granted unless a warrant is produced; or (4) the purpose of a
search may be frustrated or seriously prejudiced unless a police officer arriving at the premises can secure
immediate entry to them.

                                                        168
occupation or control that can be specified and that are to be searched. The warrant must also
identify, as far as it is practicable, the articles or persons to be sought 1280.

According to Section 22 PPP Act, a police officer who is lawfully on any premises may
furthermore seize anything at those premises, including any information which is stored in
electronic form 1281, if he has reasonable grounds for believing 1282 that it has been obtained in
consequence of the commission of an offence or that the item is evidence in relation to an
offence which he is investigating or any other offence, and that it is necessary to seize it in
order to prevent it being concealed, lost, damaged, altered or destroyed 1283.

Importantly, the Isle of Man Department of Home Affairs has adopted a code of practice for
searches and the seizure and treatment of property by police officers which sets out additional
limitations and safeguards 1284. The Code notably stresses that “[t]he right to privacy and
respect for personal property are key principles of the Human Rights Act 2001. Powers of
entry, search and seizure should be fully and clearly justified before use because they may
significantly interfere with the occupier’s privacy. Officers should consider if the necessary
objectives can be met by less intrusive means. Powers to search and seize must be used fairly,
responsibly, with respect for people who occupy premises being searched or are in charge of
property being seized and without unlawful discrimination” 1285. The Code also specifies in
more detail the requirements for making an application for a search warrant, in particular the
need to check the accuracy of information on which an application for a search warrant is
based 1286.

Specific limitations and safeguards also apply to the interception of communication in the
course of transmission by post, by means of a courier service or a public telecommunication
system 1287. The interception of communications is regulated in the Interception of

1280
     Section 18(6) PPP Act.
1281
     The police officer may require that information to be produced in a form in which it can be taken away and
in which it is visible and legible or from which it can readily be produced in a visible and legible form, see
Section 22(4) PPP Act.
1282
     On the interpretation of the ‘reasonable grounds to believe’ test, Manx courts are likely to follow English
precedent in the absence of case law from Manx courts. Under English case law, the test is understood to require
suspicion (rather than proof). See R H and ors (minors) [1996] 1 All ER 1 at pages 20 (para f) to 21 (para a), per
Lord Nicholls.
1283
     According to Section 24 PPP Act, the police officer who seizes anything must, if requested by the occupier
of premises, provide in reasonable time that person with a record of what he has seized. The police officer must
also grant access to or supply a photograph or a copy of the seized or retained item at the request of the person
who had custody of the item before it was seized. Pursuant to Section 25 PPP Act, anything that has been seized
by the police officer may be retained as long as is necessary in all the circumstances.
1284
     The legal basis and value of the Code of Practice are set out in Sections 75 and 76 PPP Act. Pursuant to these
provisions, the Code of Practice has to be approved by Tynwald. A police officer shall be liable to disciplinary
proceedings for a failure to comply with any provision of the code and the code shall be admissible as evidence
in all criminal and civil proceedings The current Police Powers and Procedures Code is set out in the Police
Powers       and       Procedures      Codes      Order       2014       [SD      2014/0363],     available      at:
https://www.tynwald.org.im/links/tls/SD/2014/2014-SD-0363.pdf.
1285
     Police Powers and Procedures Code, Code B, paragraphs 1.3 and 1.3A.
1286
     Police Powers and Procedures Code, Code B, paragraph 3.1 et seq.
1287
      Pursuant to the IOCA, ‘public telecommunication system’ has the same meaning as in the
Telecommunications Act 1984. Section 2(1) of the Telecommunications Act 1984 defines ‘telecommunication
system’ as a system for the conveyance, through the agency of electric, magnetic, electro-magnetic, electro-
chemical or electro-mechanical energy, of (1) speech, music and other sounds; (2) visual images; (3) signals
serving for the impartation (whether as between persons and persons, things and things or persons and things) of
any matter otherwise than in the form of sounds or visual images; or (4) signals serving for the actuation or

                                                       169
Communications Act 1988 (IOCA). Section 1 IOCA introduces a general principle of
confidentiality of communications by providing that it is an offence to intentionally intercept
communications. Section 1 further clarifies that to be lawful, any interception of
communications must be authorised by a warrant issued by the Chief Minister under section 2
IOCA 1288. The Chief Minister can only issue a warrant if s/he considers that the warrant is
necessary in the interests of national security or for the purpose of preventing or detecting
serious crime 1289. Importantly, in considering the necessity of a warrant, the Chief Minister
must assess whether the information sought to be obtained could reasonably be acquired by
other, less intrusive means 1290. Before issuing or renewing a warrant the Chief Minister is
required to consult the Attorney General, i.e., obtain legal advice from the Government’s
principal legal adviser on whether the conditions for issuing a warrant are fulfilled.

As the further conditions, limitations and safeguards that apply to the issuing of interception
warrants are identical for interception carried out for law enforcement and for national
security purposes, they are addressed in detail in the section on access and use of personal
data by Isle of Man public authorities for national security purposes.

In the Isle of Man, criminal law enforcement authorities can also obtain personal data from
business organisations in the context of financial and asset recovery investigations. These
powers are governed by the Proceeds of Crime Act 2008 (POCA) which covers confiscation
investigations 1291, money laundering investigations 1292, civil recovery investigations1293, and
detained cash investigations 1294. During such investigations, police officers 1295 may request a
Deemster 1296 to issue several types of orders: production orders 1297, search and seizure


control of machinery or apparatus .In accordance with Section 7 of the Telecommunications Act 1984, public
telecommunication systems are telecommunication systems the running of which is authorised by a licence and
which have been designated as a public telecommunication system by order of the Council of Ministers.
1288
     Interception without warrant is only lawful in specific limited circumstances, i.e., when intercepting with the
consent of the sender or recipient (Section 1(2)(b) IOCA) and in case of limited administrative and enforcement
purposes (Section 1(3)(a) and (b) IOCA).
1289
      Section 2(2) IOCA. The notion of ‘serious crime’ is defined in Section 33(4) of the Regulation of
Surveillance Act 2006 as covering conduct for which a person who has attained the age of twenty-one and has no
previous convictions could reasonably be expected to be sentenced to custody for a term of 3 years or more, or
conduct which involves the use of violence, results in substantial financial gain or is conduct by a large number
of persons in pursuit of a common purpose.
1290
     Section 2(3) IOCA. See also Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner for the year that
ended on 31st December 2018, available at: https://www.gov.im/media/1367579/ioc-commissioners-report-for-
the-year-ended-31122018-gd2019-0020.pdf.
1291
     Under Section 159(1) POCA, a confiscation investigation is an investigation into whether a person has
benefited from his or her criminal conduct, or the extent or whereabouts of the benefit from his or her criminal
conduct.
1292
     Under Section 159(5) POCA, a money laundering investigation is an investigation into whether a person has
committed a money laundering offence or an ancillary money laundering offence.
1293
     Under Section 159(2) POCA, a civil recovery investigation is an investigation into whether property is
recoverable property or associated property, who holds the property, or its extent or whereabouts.
1294
     Under Section 159(4) POCA, a detained cash investigation is an investigation for the purposes of recovery of
cash (under Chapter 3 Part 1 POCA) into the derivation of cash detained or a part of such cash, or whether cash
detained, or a part of such cash, is intended to be used in unlawful conduct.
1295
     Police officers are not the only persons able to request such orders and warrants. Under Sections 169(5) and
170(12) POCA, an appropriate person is (1) a police officer or a customs officer, if the warrant is sought for the
purposes of a confiscation investigation or a money laundering investigation; (2) a person authorised by the
Attorney General, if the warrant is sought for the purposes of a civil recovery investigation; or (3) a police
officer or a customs officer, if the warrant is sought for the purposes of a detained cash investigation.
1296
     Deemsters are full-time judges on the Isle of Man.

                                                       170
warrants 1298, disclosure orders 1299, customer information orders 1300, and account monitoring
orders 1301. Each type of order is subject to strict formal and substantial requirements. In
essence, the scope of such orders is always limited to one individual or one set of premises,
they must contain specific mandatory information, and they may only be issued for limited
purposes. For example, search and seizure warrants must specify the subject of the
investigation (a person or property), they must state that the order is sought for the purposes
of the investigation and in relation to material specified in the application, and that the person
specified in the application appears to be in possession or control of that material 1302. Then, a
Deemster may only issue the order if there are reasonable grounds to believe or suspect 1303
that there is related material specified in the warrant 1304 on the premises 1305, and that, for
instance, in the case of a money laundering investigation, the person specified in the
application has committed a money laundering offence or an ancillary money laundering
offence 1306.

The Anti-Terrorism and Crime Act 2003 (ATCA) provides the Isle of Man police with
specific powers to obtain information in the course of terrorism investigations, including by
conducting searches and seizures, by obtaining customer information and through account
monitoring orders. These powers can generally be exercised only on the basis of a search
warrant issued by a Justice of the Peace under similar procedural and substantive conditions
as regular warrants 1307. However, in the specific context of anti-terrorism, warrantless
searches are allowed on the basis of a written order from a police officer of at least the rank of
chief inspector, but only in case of serious emergency requiring immediate action 1308.

1297
     Sections 162 – 168 POCA. Production orders require a specified person to produce material in their
possession or control or give access to that material within the period stated in the order.
1298
     Sections 169 – 173 POCA. Search and seizure warrants are used to obtain that material where a production
order is not available, or not complied with.
1299
     Sections 174 – 179 POCA. Disclosure orders require a specified person to answer questions, provide
specified information, and/or produce specified documents.
1300
     Sections 180 – 186 POCA. Customer information orders require a financial institution to provide customer
information in relation to persons specified in the order.
1301
     Sections 187 – 192 POCA. Account monitoring orders require a financial institution to provide specified
account information for a specified period.
1302
     Section 169(2) and (3) POCA.
1303
     The tests of reasonable ground to ‘believe’ or ‘suspect’ are synonymous and used interchangeably, both are
considered language of suspicion. See R H and ors (minors) [1996] 1 All ER 1 at pages 20 (para. f) to 21 (para.
a), per Lord Nicholls.
1304
     Section 170(6) – (10) POCA.
1305
     Section 169(3) POCA.
1306
     Sections 169(6) and 170 POCA.
1307
     Part V and Schedule 5 to ATCA. Such a warrant authorises a police officer to enter the premises covered by
the warrant, to search the premises and any person found there, and to seize and retain any relevant material,
which is found on a search. The warrant does not authorize the seizure and retention of items subject to legal
privilege. A Justice of the Peace may issue a warrant only if satisfied (1) that the warrant is sought for the
purposes of a terrorist investigation; (2) that there are reasonable grounds for believing that there is material on
the premises to which the application relates which is likely to be of substantial value, whether by itself or
together with other material, to a terrorist investigation and which does not consist of or include excluded
material, items subject to legal privilege, or special procedure material; (3) that the issue of a warrant is likely to
be necessary in the circumstances of the case; and (4) in the case of an application for an all premises warrant,
that it is not reasonably practicable to specify in the application all the premises which the person specified
occupies or controls and which might need to be searched. Under sub-paragraph 3 of Schedule 5 to ATCA, the
material is relevant if the police officer has reasonable grounds for believing that (1) it is likely to be of
substantial value, whether by itself or together with other material, to a terrorist investigation, and (2) it must be
seized in order to prevent it from being concealed, lost, damaged, altered or destroyed.
1308
     Paragraph 14 of Schedule 5 to the ATCA.

                                                         171
Furthermore, a police officer, or a person authorised in writing by the Attorney General, may
also request account monitoring orders to a High Court judge 1309. Such an order may not
exceed 90 days 1310, is subject to formal requirements 1311, and may only be issued if the tracing
of the terrorist property is desirable for the purposes of the investigation and will enhance its
effectiveness 1312. Lastly, the police also have the power to obtain customer information
orders 1313. Such orders may be issued by a High Court judge under the same conditions as an
account monitoring order 1314.

Finally, criminal law enforcement authorities in the Isle of Man, including the FIU, may
obtain personal data through (voluntary) disclosure by private individuals, business
organisations or public authorities.

In terms of disclosures to the FIU, Sections 142 – 144 POCA introduce an obligation to
disclose information related to suspected money laundering when a person obtained that
information in the course of a business in the so-called regulated sector 1315. Section 14 ACTA
similarly imposes a duty on the regulated sector to disclose information where there are
reasonable grounds for knowing or suspecting that another person has committed an offence
related to financing of terrorism 1316. Section 11 of the ACTA requires any other person that
believes or suspects, based on information which comes to his or her attention in the course of
a business or employment, that another person has committed an offence related to the
financing of terrorism, to disclose this suspicion, and the information on which it is based.
According to Section 12 ACTA, any person may disclose to the FIU a suspicion or belief that
any money or other property is terrorist property (or is derived from terrorist property), as
well as any matter on which the suspicion or belief is based. Pursuant to the Financial
Intelligence Unit Act 2016 (FIUA), any person may disclose information if the disclosure is
made for the purposes of the exercise of any functions of the FIU 1317. The FIU then has the
power to request additional information from certain entities or individuals 1318, but only when
it reasonably considers that, for the proper fulfilment of any of its functions, it is necessary or
expedient to seek additional information from the person in question 1319.

In terms of disclosures to the Isle of Man police, Section 26 ACTA imposes a duty on any
person to disclose specific information which he or she knows or believes to be of material

1309
     Schedule 4 to the ATCA.
1310
     Paragraph 2(5) of Schedule 4 to the ATCA.
1311
     According to Paragraph 2(2) of Schedule 4 to the ATCA, the application for an account monitoring order
must state that the order is sought against the financial institution specified in the application and in relation to
information related to an account or accounts held at the institution by the person specified in the application.
According to paragraph 2(3), the application for an account monitoring order may specify information relating to
all accounts held by the person specified in the application at the specified financial institution, particular
descriptions of accounts held, or particular accounts.
1312
     Paragraph 2(1) of Schedule 4 to the ATCA.
1313
     Schedule 6 to the ATCA.
1314
     Paragraph 5 of Schedule 6 to the ATCA.
1315
     The regulated sector is defined in paragraph 2 of Schedule 4 to the POCA and includes financial services,
insurance businesses, collective investment schemes, an administrator or trustee of a retirement benefits scheme,
external accountants, tax advisers, payroll agents; etc.
1316
     These include fund-raising, use of money or other property and facilitating funding for the purposes of
terrorism, and money laundering related to terrorist property (Sections 7-10 ACTA).
1317
     Section 24(1) FIUA.
1318
     Section 18 FIUA.
1319
     Section 18(1)(b) FIUA.

                                                        172
assistance in preventing the commission of an act of terrorism, or in securing the
apprehension, prosecution or conviction of another person, in the Isle of Man, for an offence
involving the commission, preparation or instigation of an act of terrorism. In addition,
Section 56 ACTA provides that public authorities may (voluntarily) disclose certain
information obtained under other Isle of Man legislation 1320. In that case, no disclosure of
information can be made unless the public authority is satisfied that making the disclosure is
proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by it 1321.

Importantly, any disclosure of personal data on the basis of the abovementioned provisions
has to comply with the Applied GDPR and the Implementing Regulations, and the further
processing by criminal law enforcement authorities of personal data obtained through such
disclosures is subject to the provisions of the Applied LED and the Implementing
Regulations.

        2.2.2. Further use of the information collected

The further use of data collected by Isle of Man criminal law enforcement authorities on one
of the grounds referred to in Section 2.1.1, as well as the sharing of such data with a different
authority for purposes other than the ones for which it was originally collected (so-called
‘onward sharing’), is subject to safeguards and limitations.

First, the processing of personal data by law enforcement authorities in the Isle of Man is
governed by the provisions of the Applied LED and the Implementing Regulations as
described in section 2.1. With respect to onward sharing, Article 4(2) of the Applied LED,
like the LED, allows that personal data collected for a law enforcement purpose may be
further processed (whether by the original controller or by another controller) for any other
law enforcement purpose, provided that the controller is authorised by law to process data for
the other purpose and the processing is necessary and proportionate to that purpose. In this
case, all the safeguards provided by the Applied LED, the Applied GDPR and the
Implementing Regulations (referred to in section 2.1) apply to the processing carried out by
the receiving authority.

Second, the different laws that allow for data collection by criminal law enforcement
authorities in the Isle of Man impose specific limitations and safeguards as to the use and
further dissemination of the information obtained in exercising the powers they grant.

As regards the powers of search and seizure under the PPP Act, the police officer who seizes
anything must, if requested by the occupier of premises, provide in reasonable time that
person with a record of what he has seized. The police officer must also grant access to or
supply a photograph or a copy of the seized or retained item at the request of the person who


1320
     See Schedule 10, which lists the information (obtained on the basis of other laws) that may be disclosed.
This includes e.g., information obtained under the Telecommunications Act, Police Act, Consumer Protection
Act, etc. Information can be disclosed for the purpose of (1) any criminal investigation which is being or may be
carried out, whether in the Isle of Man or elsewhere; (2) criminal proceedings which have been or may be
initiated, whether in the Isle of Man or elsewhere; (3) the initiation or bringing to an end of any such
investigation or proceedings; or for (4) facilitating a determination of whether any such investigation or
proceedings should be initiated or brought to an end.
1321
     Section 56(3) of the ATCA.

                                                      173
had custody of the item before it was seized 1322. Importantly, anything that has been seized by
the police may not be retained longer than necessary in the circumstances 1323.

With respect to the interception of communications, Section 6 of the IOCA sets out the
safeguards that need to be applied to intercepted material. Notably, when issuing an
interception warrant, the Chief Minister is required to make arrangements to limit the
dissemination of the material to the minimum necessary for the purposes authorised by the
warrant. In particular, the Chief Minister must limit the extent to which the material is
disclosed, the number of persons to whom any of the material is disclosed, the extent to which
the material is copied as well as the number of copies made of any of the material 1324. In
addition, the IOCA explicitly provides that the material may not be retained for longer than
necessary to fulfil the purpose for which it was obtained 1325.

In terms of investigative measures carried out in the context of terrorism offenses and money
laundering, the ATCA allows the sharing of information with any of the British intelligence
services for the purpose of the exercise by that service of any of its functions, but only if such
sharing is not in violation of the data protection legislation or prohibited by the IOCA 1326.

Finally, the Criminal Justice Act 1991 provides the rules on mutual legal assistance in
criminal matter 1327. The Attorney General may provide evidence located on the Isle of Man to
a third country’s court or prosecuting authority if there are reasonable grounds to suspect that
an offence according to that third country’s law has been committed, and if proceedings or an
investigation are ongoing about that offence 1328. The Attorney General must request a warrant
to a Deemster before granting access to the evidence 1329. For the warrant to be granted, the
offense in the third country would need to also be recognised as such under Isle of Man law
had it taken place on the Island, and there needs to be reasonable grounds to suspect that the
evidence is located on premises on the Island 1330.

        2.2.3. Oversight

Different bodies have oversight over the processing of personal data by criminal law
enforcement authorities in the Isle of Man.

First, the Information Commissioner, whose independence is enshrined in law 1331, oversees
the application of the Applied LED and the Implementing Regulations 1332. The tasks and


1322
     Section 24 PPP Act.
1323
     Section 25 PPP Act.
1324
     Section 6 IOCA. Under Section 11 IOCA, a copy is defined as any of the following, whether or not in
documentary form (1) any copy, extract or summary of the material; and (2) any record of the identities of the
persons to or by whom the material was sent, and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly.
1325
     Section 6(3) IOCA.
1326
     Section 58A(3) ATCA and Article 7 in conjunction with Schedule 2 Applied GDPR.
1327
     Importantly, the Proceeds of Crime (External Investigations) Order 2011 (secondary legislation made under
the POCA) extends the investigative measures in accordance with POCA, for use in response to mutual legal
assistance requests from other jurisdictions.
1328
     Section 21(3) Criminal Justice Act 1991.
1329
     Section 22 Criminal Justice Act 1991
1330
     Section 22(1) Criminal Justice Act 1991.
1331
     The Applied LED retains the rules of Article 42 Law Enforcement Directive on the independence of the
supervisory authority without modification. The Information Commissioner must remain free from external

                                                    174
powers of the Information Commissioner mirror those set out in Article 46 and 47 of the Law
Enforcement Directive. To perform those tasks, the Information Commission may issue
several types of notices and orders and has the power to bring court proceedings for non-
compliance with such notices or orders 1333. Information notices require a controller or
processor to disclose the information the Commissioner needs for the discharge of his or her
functions under the data protection legislation 1334. Assessment notices permit to verify a
controller or processor’s compliance with data protection legislation, for instance by allowing
on-site investigations and access to any data processing equipment, any document, material or
information 1335. Enforcement orders permit to compel a person to take or refrain from taking
certain actions, for example in relation to the data protection principles, data subjects’ rights,
or the obligation to notify data breaches 1336. According to information provided by the Isle of
Man authorities, since the entry into force of the Applied LED and the Implementing
Regulations, the Information Commissioner has investigated several complaints that
concerned the Isle of Man Constabulary. In two cases, minor compliance issues were
detected, such as non-compliance with a data subject’s request for access to personal data.
Those issues were rectified further to the Commissioner’s advice. The Information
Commissioner also regularly engages with law enforcement authorities by providing guidance
and advice, notably to the authorities’ data protection officers.

Second, the Interception of Communications Commissioner oversees the application of the
IOCA, i.e., the interception of communications for the purposes of national security and of
detecting and preventing serious crime 1337. The functions of the Commissioner are to keep
under review the activities of the Chief Minister relating to his functions under the IOCA and
the adequacy of the safeguards implemented in connection with interception under the IOCA.
The Interception of Communications Commissioner must also assist the Interception of
Communications Tribunal (see section 2.2.4) for the purpose of enabling it to carry out its
functions under the IOCA 1338.

Every person holding office under the Crown, a person engaged in the business of the Post
Office or a person in the running of a courier service or a public telecommunications system
is required to disclose to the Interception of Communication Commissioner all documents or
information that the Commissioner may require for the purpose of enabling him to carry out
his functions 1339.




influence, whether direct or indirect, and neither seek nor take instructions from anybody. Furthermore, the
Commissioner must refrain from any action incompatible with his or her duties.
1332
     Regulation 79 Implementing Regulations.
1333
     Regulation 117 Implementing Regulations.
1334
     Regulation 101 Implementing Regulations.
1335
     Regulation 104(2) Implementing Regulations.
1336
     Regulation 106 Implementing Regulations.
1337
     The role of the Interception of Communications Commissioner is established by the IOCA. In accordance
with Section 9(1) IOCA, the Commissioner is appointed by the Governor and must be “a fit and proper person”.
1338
     Section 9(1) IOCA.
1339
     Section 9(3) IOCA.

                                                    175
The Interception of Communication Commissioner is required to prepare an annual report to
the Governor in Council 1340. A copy of every annual report must be submitted to the Isle of
Man parliament (Tynwald) and made public 1341.

If it appears to the Interception of Communication Commissioner that there has been a
contravention of rules governing the issuance of interception warrants which has not been the
subject of a report made by the Tribunal under the IOCA (see section 2.2.4), or that the
safeguards that have been put in place in relation to the retention and disclosure of the
intercepted material are inadequate, (s)he must report to the Governor in Council 1342.

Pursuant to the Commissioner’s recent annual reports, interception warrants in the Isle of Man
have been issued for the purposes of the detection and prevention of serious crimes. The
Commissioner found that the warrants had been issued in respect of the principles of necessity
and proportionality and in compliance with procedural requirements, notably the need to
consult the Attorney General before the issuing of a warrant. Finally, she found that the
safeguards required by Section 6 IOCA had been implemented in a satisfactory manner, while
noting in her latest annual report of 2020 that the related policies and procedures had been
recently updated by the Cabinet Office in cooperation with the Constabulary, leading to an
improvement in the practical aspects of the procedure 1343.

        2.2.4. Redress

As regards the processing of personal data by law enforcement authorities in the Isle of Man,
redress mechanisms are available under the data protection legislation, the Human Rights Act
2001 and under the IOCA.

This series of mechanisms provide data subjects with effective administrative and judicial
means of redress, enabling them in particular to ensure their rights, including the right to have
access to their personal data, or to obtain the rectification or erasure of such data.

First, pursuant to Regulation 122 of the Implementing Regulations, data subjects have the
right to lodge a complaint with the Information Commissioner if the data subject considers
that, in connection with personal data relating to him or her, there is an infringement of the
data protection legislation. The Information Commissioner has the power to assess the
compliance of the controller and processor with the Applied LED and the Implementing
Regulations and require them to take necessary steps in case of non-compliance 1344.



1340
     Section 9(6) IOCA.
1341
     Section 9(7) IOCA. Under section 9(8) IOCA, the Governor in Council may exclude certain matters from the
copy of the report as laid before Tynwald, if he considers, after consultation with the Commissioner, that the
publication of any matter in an annual report would be prejudicial to national security or to the prevention or
detection of crime.
1342
     Section 9(5) IOCA.
1343
     The Reports of the Interception of Communications Commissioner for the years ending on 31st December
2016,            2018,           2019          and           2020            are         available           at:
https://www.tynwald.org.im//business/opqp/sittings/Tynwald%2020162018/2017-GD-0008.pdf,
https://www.gov.im/media/1367579/ioc-commissioners-report-for-the-year-ended-31122018-gd2019-0020.pdf,
https://www.tynwald.org.im/business/opqp/sittings/20182021/2020-GD-0080.pdf,
https://www.tynwald.org.im/business/opqp/sittings/20212026/2021-GD-0096.pdf.
1344
     See Regulations 100 et seq. of the Implementing Regulations.

                                                     176
Second, the Implementing Regulations provide the right to a remedy against the Information
Commissioner if it fails to take appropriate steps 1345 to respond to a complaint made by the
data subject. More specifically, the complainant can apply to the Data Protection Tribunal,
which can issue an order requiring the Information Commissioner to take any steps specified
in the order or to provide the requested information to the data subject 1346.

Third, data subjects can also invoke violations of the data protection rules by criminal law
enforcement authorities directly before the courts 1347. If, on an application by a data subject, a
court is satisfied that there has been an infringement of the data subject's rights under the data
protection legislation, the court may order the controller or processor to take or refrain from
taking steps specified in the order. Moreover, a person who suffers damage by reason of a
contravention of a requirement of the data protection legislation is entitled to compensation
for that damage from the competent authority. A controller or processor is not liable if it
proves that it is not in any way responsible for the event giving rise to the damage 1348.

Fourth, as far as any person considers that their rights, including rights to privacy and data
protection, have been violated by public authorities, individuals can obtain redress before the
courts of the Isle of Man under the Human Rights Act 2001 1349. If the court finds any act of a
public authority to be unlawful, it can grant such relief or remedy, or make such order, within
its powers as it considers just and appropriate 1350. The court can also declare a provision of
primary legislation to be incompatible with a right provided by the Human Rights Act1351.
Finally, after having exhausted national remedies, a person, non-governmental organisation or
groups of individuals can obtain redress before the European Court of Human Rights for
violations of the rights guaranteed under the European Convention of Human Rights 1352.

For violations of the IOCA, individuals can obtain redress before the Interception of
Communications Tribunal. This redress avenue is described in section 2.2.4 below.

       2.3. Access and use by Isle of Man public authorities for national security purposes




1345
      The Commissioner is required to take appropriate steps to respond to the complaint, including by
investigating the subject matter of the complaint, to inform about the outcome of the complaint and about the
complainant’s right to seek redress before a tribunal, see Regulation 122(3) and (4) of the Implementing
Regulations.
1346
     Regulation 123(3) Implementing Regulations.
1347
     Regulation 124 Implementing Regulations.
1348
     Regulation 125 Implementing Regulations.
1349
     Under Section 6(1) Human Rights Act it is unlawful for a public authority to act in a way which is
incompatible with the respect for the rights provided in that law. An individual who claims that a public
authority has acted (or proposes to act) in a way which is unlawful under Section 6(1) can bring proceedings
against the authority in the appropriate court or tribunal, or rely on the rights concerned in any legal proceedings,
when he or she is (or would be) a victim of the unlawful act.
1350
     Section 8(1) Human Rights Act.
1351
     However, the declaration of incompatibility does not affect the validity, continuing operation or enforcement
of the provision in respect of which it is given, and is not binding on the parties to the proceedings in which it is
made, see Section 4 Human Rights Act.
1352
     Article 34 of the European Convention of Human Rights provides that “The Court may receive applications
from any person, non-governmental organisation or group of individuals claiming to be the victim of a violation
by one of the High Contracting Parties of the rights set forth in the Convention or the Protocols thereto. The
High Contracting Parties undertake not to hinder in any way the effective exercise of this right”.

                                                        177
In the Isle of Man, access to information transferred under the adequacy decision for purposes
of national security takes place in the form of the interception of communications on the basis
of the IOCA 1353. It is the Isle of Man Constabulary that carries out such interception.

         2.3.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

The IOCA provides the legal framework for the interception of communications in the course
of transmission by post, by means of a courier service or a public telecommunication system.
The IOCA introduces a general principle of confidentiality of communications and makes it a
criminal offence to intentionally intercept communications 1354. This is reflected in the fact
that interception is lawful only when carried out on the basis of a warrant 1355. An interception
warrant is issued by the Chief Minister and requires the person to whom it is addressed to
intercept the communications described in the warrant or to disclose the intercepted material
to such persons and in such manner as are described in the warrant 1356. An interception
warrant can only be issued if the Chief Minister considers that the information sought to be
obtained could not reasonably be acquired by other, less intrusive means 1357. Before issuing or
renewing a warrant the Chief Minister is required to consult the Attorney General, i.e., obtain
legal advice from the Government’s principal legal adviser on whether the conditions for
issuing a warrant are fulfilled. A register of warrants must be maintained, including details of
every warrant, and of every amendment, renewal and cancellation thereof, and details of
every consultation of the Attorney General 1358.

In accordance with Section 3 IOCA, the warrant must require the interception of
communications in relation to one particular person named or described in the warrant or in
relation to a single set of premises named or described in the warrant. The warrant must also
describe the communications for which interception is required by references to addresses,
numbers, apparatus or other factors to be used for identifying those communications 1359.



1353
     For the powers that can be exercised in the Isle of Man by UK intelligence services, see the Commission
Implementing Decision of 28.6.2021 pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2016/679 on the adequate protection of
personal data by the United Kingdom, available at: https://commission.europa.eu/system/files/2021-
06/decision_on_the_adequate_protection_of_personal_data_by_the_united_kingdom_-
_general_data_protection_regulation_en.pdf. The Isle of Man Regulation of Surveillance Act 2006 covers
activities that are not relevant in the context of data transfers from the EU to the Isle of Man under the adequacy
decision, such as surveillance in the form of covert human intelligence. It does not cover the interception of
communications in the course of their transmission by means of a telecommunication system, unless the
communication is sent by, or intended for, a person who has consented to the interception of communications
and there is no interception warrant under the Interception of Communications Act 1988 authorising the
interception, see Section 3(5) Regulation of Surveillance Act 2006.
1354
     Section 1 IOCA.
1355
     Section 2(1) IOCA. Interception without warrant is only lawful in specific limited circumstances, i.e., when
intercepting with the consent of the sender or recipient (Section 1(2)(b) IOCA) and in case of limited
administrative and enforcement purposes (Section 1(3)(a) and (b) IOCA).
1356
     Section 2(1) IOCA.
1357
     Section 2(3) IOCA. See also Report of the Interception of Communications Commissioner for the year that
ended on 31st December 2018, available at: https://www.gov.im/media/1367579/ioc-commissioners-report-for-
the-year-ended-31122018-gd2019-0020.pdf.
1358
     Section 6(4) and (5) IOCA.
1359
     Section 3(3) IOCA. These specifications are not required for the interception of a communication sent or
received outside the British Islands (i.e., ‘external communications’), where the Chief Minister has issued a
certificate certifying that the examination of certain described intercepted material is necessary, see Section 3(2)
IOCA. To date, no such certificate has been issued.

                                                       178
Unless it is renewed, a warrant ceases to have effect two months after its issuance. The Chief
Minister may, at any time before the end of the relevant period, renew the warrant if he
considers that the warrant continues to be necessary (on the same grounds for which it was
issued) 1360. If the Chief Minister considers that any factor specified in a warrant is no longer
relevant for identifying the communications authorised to intercept, he must amend the
warrant by deleting that factor 1361.

        2.3.2. Further use of the information collected

The further use of personal data obtained in the interests of national security is governed by
the provisions of the Applied GDPR and the Implementing Regulations as described in
sections 2.1 and 1 1362. In particular, pursuant to Articles 5(1)(a) and (b) of the Applied GDPR,
such processing must be lawful, and data must not be processed in a manner that is
incompatible with the purpose for which it was collected. The controller can process the data
for another purpose, different from that for which the data was collected, when it is
compatible with the original one and provided that the controller is authorised by law to
process the data.

In addition, the IOCA sets out specific safeguards for the further use and sharing of data
obtained through the interception of communications, including for the sharing of such data
with third countries. Section 6 IOCA specifies that the Chief Minister has the duty to make
arrangements to limit the dissemination of the material obtained to the minimum necessary for
the purposes authorised by the warrant. In particular, the Chief Minister must limit the extent
to which the material is disclosed, the number of persons to whom any of the material is
disclosed, the extent to which the material is copied as well as the number of copies made of
any of the material 1363. In addition, the IOCA explicitly provides that the material may not be
retained for longer than necessary to fulfil the purpose for which it was obtained 1364.

        2.3.3. Oversight

Government access for national security purposes in the Isle of Man is overseen by different
bodies. The Information Commissioner oversees the processing of personal data in light of the
Applied GDPR and the Implementing Regulations, while specific oversight on the use of the
interception powers under the IOCA is provided by the Interception of Communications
Commissioner, which oversees interception both for law enforcement and for national
security purposes.


1360
     The renewed warrant cease to have effect at the end of one month beginning with the day on which it was
renewed, Section 4(6)(b) IOCA.
1361
     Section 5(1) and (3) IOCA.
1362
      While controllers can be exempt from some of these provisions pursuant to Regulation 22 of the
Implementing Regulations to the extent that such exemption is required for the purposes of national security,
such exemption must be assessed case-by-case and can be invoked only as far as the application of a particular
provision would have negative consequences for national security (see section 2.1). Moreover, as any processing
for a different purpose must be authorised by law, Isle of Man authorities must have a clear legal basis for the
further processing.
1363
     Section 6 IOCA. Under Section 11 IOCA, a copy is defined as any of the following, whether or not in
documentary form (1) any copy, extract or summary of the material; and (2) any record of the identities of the
persons to or by whom the material was sent, and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly.
1364
     Section 6(3) IOCA.

                                                     179
The processing of personal data carried out for national security purposes is governed by the
Applied GDPR and the Implementing Regulations. The general functions and powers of the
Information Commissioner are laid down in Articles 57 and 58 of the Applied GDPR. The
tasks include, but are not limited to, monitoring and enforcement, promoting public
awareness, advising Tynwald, the government and other institutions on legislative and
administrative measures, promote the awareness of controllers and processors of their
obligations, provide information to a data subject concerning the exercise of the data subject’s
rights, handle complaints, conduct investigations etc. The Commissioner has the powers to
notify controllers of an alleged infringement and to issue warnings that a processing is likely
to infringe the rules, issue reprimands, ban processing or order the controller to take certain
actions. While Regulation 22 of the Implementing Regulations provides an exception to
certain tasks and powers of the Commissioner if this is required for the purposes of
safeguarding national security, these exceptions apply only if necessary and proportionate and
on a case-by-case basis (as explained in section 2.1).

Furthermore, as described in section 2.1.3 above, the Interception of Communications
Commissioner oversees the application of the IOCA, i.e., the interception of communications
for the purposes of national security and for detecting and preventing serious crime 1365. (S)he
reviews the activities of the Chief Minister relating to his functions under the IOCA and the
adequacy of the safeguards implemented in connection with interception under the IOCA and
assists the Interceptions of Communications Tribunal (see section 2.2.4) 1366. The
Commissioner prepares an annual report to the Governor in Council 1367, a copy of which must
be submitted to the Isle of Man parliament and made public 1368. If it appears to the
Commissioner that there has been a contravention of rules governing the issuance of
interception warrants or that safeguards that have been put in place in relation to the retention
and disclosure of the intercepted material are inadequate, (s)he must report to the Governor in
Council 1369.

Pursuant to the Commissioner’s recent annual reports, no interception warrants since 2016
have been issued in the interest of national security 1370.

        2.3.4. Redress

Individuals can obtain redress for violations of the IOCA before the Interception of
Communications Tribunal.

1365
     The role of the Interception of Communications Commissioner is established by the IOCA. In accordance
with Section 9(1) IOCA, the Commissioner is appointed by the Governor and must be “a fit and proper person”.
1366
     Section 9(1) IOCA.
1367
     Section 9(6) IOCA.
1368
     Section 9(7) IOCA. Under section 9(8) IOCA, the Governor in Council may exclude certain matters from the
copy of the report as laid before Tynwald, if he considers, after consultation with the Commissioner, that the
publication of any matter in an annual report would be prejudicial to national security or to the prevention or
detection of crime.
1369
     Section 9(5) IOCA.
1370
     The Reports of the Interception of Communications Commissioner for the years ending on 31st December
2016,            2018,           2019          and          2020             are         available           at:
https://www.tynwald.org.im//business/opqp/sittings/Tynwald%2020162018/2017-GD-0008.pdf,
https://www.gov.im/media/1367579/ioc-commissioners-report-for-the-year-ended-31122018-gd2019-0020.pdf,
https://www.tynwald.org.im/business/opqp/sittings/20182021/2020-GD-0080.pdf,
https://www.tynwald.org.im/business/opqp/sittings/20212026/2021-GD-0096.pdf.

                                                     180
Any person, including any individual in the EU, who believes 1371 that communications sent to
or by him have been intercepted, can apply to the Interception of Communications Tribunal
for an investigation. The Tribunal has been established in accordance with Section 8 IOCA
and it is independent from the executive 1372. When receiving an application, the Interception
of Communications Tribunal must investigate whether there is or has been a relevant 1373
warrant or certificate, and where this is the case, whether there has been any violation of the
rules under the IOCA in relation to that warrant or certificate. The Tribunal may only reject
applications that appear to be frivolous or vexatious.

If the Interception of Communications Tribunal concludes that there has been a violation of
the rules of the IOCA, it must notify the applicant about its conclusions, report its findings to
the Governor in Council and, if appropriate, make an order to (1) quash the relevant warrant
or the relevant certificate; (2) delete copies of the intercepted material; (3) direct the Treasury
to pay to the applicant a compensation 1374. The Interception of Communications Tribunal
must also notify the applicant in case it comes to the conclusion that there has been no
contravention of the rules of the IOCA. According to Section 8(8) IOCA the decision of the
Tribunal is not subject to appeal.

Finally, as also described in section 2.1.4 above, as far as individuals consider that their
rights, including rights to privacy and data protection, have been violated by public
authorities, they can obtain redress before the courts of the Isle of Man under the Human
Rights Act 2001. In addition, any individual may obtain judicial redress before the European
Court of Human Rights against the unlawful collection of his/her data for national security
purposes, provided that all available domestic remedies have been exhausted.




1371
     On the standard of the ‘belief’ test, in the absence of relevant case law in the Isle of Man, UK case law is
likely to be persuasive. In Human Rights Watch v Secretary of State [2016] UKIPTrib15_165-CH, paragraph 41,
the Investigatory Powers Tribunal, by referring to the European Court of Human Rights case law, held that the
appropriate test is whether in respect of the asserted belief that any conduct falling within Subsection 68(5) of
RIPA 2000 has been carried out by or on behalf of any of the intelligence services, there is any basis for such
belief, such that the individual may claim to be a victim of a violation occasioned by the mere existence of secret
measures or legislation permitting secret measures, only if he is able to show that due to his personal situation,
he is potentially at risk of being subjected to such measures.
1372
     In accordance with Schedule 1 IOCA, the Tribunal has three members, who are appointed by the Governor.
The Chairman of the Tribunal must be an advocate of not less than 10 years’ standing. The members are
appointed for a term of 5 years and can be reappointed. A member of the Tribunal may only be removed from
office by the Governor at his or her own request, or on the basis of a resolution of Tynwald. Every person
holding office under the Crown or engaged in the business of the Post Office, in the running of a courier service
or a public telecommunication system is obliged to disclose or give to the Tribunal such documents or
information as they may require for the purpose of enabling them to carry out their functions.
1373
     A warrant is a relevant warrant in relation to an applicant if the applicant is named or described in the
warrant, or the communications described in the warrant are likely to be, or to include communications from him
or intended for him (Section 8(9) IOCA).
1374
     Section 8(4) and (5) IOCA.

                                                       181
                                        VII. STATE OF ISRAEL

1. RULES APPLYING TO THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA

       1.1. Relevant developments in the data protection framework of Israel

On 31 January 2011 the European Commission adopted a decision in which the State of
Israel, as defined in accordance with international law, was considered as providing an
adequate level of protection for personal data 1375. The Article 29 Working Party had provided
its opinion on the level of protection for personal data in Israel on 1 November 2009 1376. At
the time, the legal framework for the protection of personal data in Israel was set out in the
Privacy Protection Law 5741 - 1981 (PPL) and Regulations. The PPL was first passed in 1981
and applies to both the public and the private sector.

Since the adoption of the Commission’s adequacy decision, Israel’s framework for the
protection of privacy and personal data has been significantly strengthened through a number
of developments at legislative, regulatory and enforcement level. In particular, as described in
more detail below, Israel adopted Privacy Protection (Data Security) Regulations, 5777-2017
(Data Security Regulations) which apply to the public and to the private sector and are aimed
at improving the level of data security across all sectors by setting general legally binding
standards 1377. In addition, Israel introduced specific safeguards to reinforce the protection of
personal data transferred from the European Economic Area by adopting Privacy Protection
Regulations (Instructions for Data that was Transferred to Israel from the European Economic
Area), 5783-2023 (Privacy Protection Regulations) 1378. Moreover, Israeli Courts have
clarified and further reinforced the existing framework in several judgments that interpret the



1375
     Commission Decision 2011/61/EU of 31 January 2011 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the adequate protection of personal data by the State of Israel with regard to
automated processing of personal data, OJ L 27, 1.2.2011, p. 39–42. The decision on the adequate protection of
personal data by the State of Israel is to be applied in accordance with international law and is without prejudice
to the status of the Golan Heights, the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, under the terms
of international law. See Article 2(2) of the adequacy decision. Recital 14 of the decision furthermore provides
that onward transfers to a recipient outside the State of Israel, as defined in accordance with international law,
should be considered as transfers of personal data to a third country. Consequently, transfers from the State of
Israel to territories beyond its internationally recognised borders should be subject to the same legal safeguards
applicable to onward transfers.
1376
      Opinion 6/2009 on the level of protection of personal data in Israel (WP165), available at:
https://ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2009/wp165_en.pdf.
1377
     Privacy Protection (Data Security) Regulations, 5777-2017, adopted on 5 April 2017, available at:
https://www.gov.il/BlobFolder/legalinfo/data_security_regulation/en/PROTECTION%20OF%20PRIVACY%20
REGULATIONS.pdf. The Regulations apply to all databases, whether or not they are subject to a registration
requirement under the PPL.
1378
     Privacy Protection Regulations (Instructions for Data that was Transferred to Israel from the European
Economic Area), 5783-2023, published in the Official Gazette (Reshumut) on 7 May 2023, available at:
https://www.gov.il/en/departments/legalInfo/datatransferredisrael2023. As provided for by Article 36 PPL, the
Regulations have been approved by the Constitution, Law and Justice Committee of the Israeli Parliament
(Knesset) and promulgated by the Minister of Justice. Their scope of application is set out in Regulation 2(a) of
the Privacy Protection Regulations. They apply to data that is in a database in Israel that has been transferred
from the European Economic Area, except for data that a natural person directly provided on his initiative, as
well as to any other data in a database in Israel that contains such data. In accordance with Regulation 9(1), the
Regulations entered into application on 7 August 2023 with respect to data received in a database in Israel on or
after the day of the publication of the Regulations, and will enter into force one year from the date of their
publication with respect to data received in a database in Israel before that day.

                                                       182
right to privacy set out in the Basic Law 1379 and the provisions of the PPL. Finally, Israel’s
Privacy Protection Authority (PPA) 1380 has clarified important elements of the data protection
system in Israel through the adoption of guidelines, opinions and directives, for instance on
the interpretation of the term ‘data’ and on the right of access.

While the developments in terms of guidance, interpretation and case law that are described in
more detail below contribute to an increased level of data protection in Israel, codifying these
developments in legislation would be important to enhance legal certainty and solidify the
protection for personal data. The ongoing debate on a draft bill that would amend the PPL1381
seems to offer such an opportunity.

More specifically, since the adoption of the adequacy decision, the PPL’s scope of application
has been further clarified in various judgments, government resolutions and opinions of the
PPA.

In the Israeli system, personal data is protected in accordance with Chapters A and B of the
PPL. Chapter A protects the right to privacy more generally, while Chapter B specifically
regulates the protection of data in databases.

Chapter A of the PPL prohibits certain infringements of privacy 1382 by reference to categories
such as “information on a person’s private affairs” 1383, as well as “a matter that relates to a
persons’ intimate life” 1384 and “other data obtained in a way which infringes privacy under the
provisions of the Article” 1385. Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, the categories used
in Chapter A of the PPL have been further clarified by Israeli courts. For example, courts
have confirmed that data such as residential address and telephone number also constitute


1379
     In Israel there is no codified constitution, but there are Basic Laws which have been given constitutional
status by the Supreme Court of Israel. The right to privacy is enshrined in Article 7 of the Basic Law: Human
Dignity and Liberty.
1380
     As described in more detail in section 1.2, the PPL foresees that the oversight over the protection of privacy
is carried out by the so-called Registrar, who, pursuant to Article 7 PPL, is a person qualified to be appointed as
a Magistrates Court judge and is appointed by the Government to operate the databases register. By decision of
the government of Israel of 2006, this Registrar was integrated into the Israeli Law, Information and Technology
Authority (ILITA), which was created by that same decision. The role of the Head of ILITA was assigned to the
Registrar, see Article 10(e) PPL and Article 4(A) of Government Resolution No. 1890 of 2 October 2022. ILITA
was later renamed as Privacy Protection Authority.
1381
     Privacy Protection Bill (Amendment No. 14), 5722-2022, amending the Protection of Privacy Law, 5741-
1981, submitted to the Knesset on 5 January 2022. On 3 April 2023 the Israeli Ministerial Committee on
Legislation decided to apply to the Knesset for the application of the rule of continuity for the advancement of
the Privacy Protection Bill (Amendment No. 14), 5722-2022, after its progress had been stalled due to the
dissolution of the Knesset. On 29 May 2023 the Parliament decided to apply the rule of continuity for
advancement of the Bill and the Bill was allocated to the Constitution Law and Justice Committee.
1382
     While the list of infringements is in principle exhaustive, several elements are construed broadly to cover a
range of possible infringements. See for instance Article 2(8) PPL, which prohibits the infringement of the duty
of confidentiality in respect to a person’s private affairs, whether it was explicitly or implicitly prescribed in an
agreement; or Article 2(9), which prohibits the use or passing on of information on a person’s private affairs, for
a purpose other than for which it was provided. In addition, the Supreme Court has ruled that, beyond the
protection specifically provided by Article 2, Israeli common law continues to apply (HCJ Jane Doe 6650/04,
Kalanswa Case 7541-04-14 and CA John Doe 8954/11). With respect to public authorities, infringements of
privacy other than those listed in Article 2 PPL may be considered a violation of Article 7 of the Basic law:
Human Dignity and Liberty.
1383
     Article 2(9) PPL.
1384
     Article 2(11) PPL.
1385
     Article 2 (10) PPL.

                                                        183
“information of a person's private affairs” and are protected under the law 1386. Moreover, a
person’s bank account number 1387, credit card number 1388, personal calls log1389, and a
person's application to the authorities for filing a complaint 1390 were considered as
information on a person’s private affairs.

In Chapter B, the notion of ‘database’ is defined as “a collection of data, kept by magnetic or
optic means, and intended for computer processing”, which has been interpreted broadly to
apply to any type of data stored digitally 1391. Article 7 PPL defines the term ‘data’ as data on
personality, personal status, intimate affairs, state of health, economic state, vocational
qualifications, opinions, and beliefs of a person. To ensure more comprehensive protection,
Article 7 PPL has been interpreted broadly by Israeli courts to apply to almost any kind of
data. For example, the case law rejected the claim that foreclosure orders are not ‘data’ as
defined in the PPL and held that, in the digital age which enables enhanced searches and
processing of data and cross-referencing, the definition of private data must be interpreted
more broadly 1392. In another ruling, the Supreme Court 1393 rejected the claim that national
identity numbers do not constitute ‘private data’ as defined by the PPL and found that a
national identity number is not just a “sequence of numbers”, but rather an identifier that, in
combination with additional data, can be used to conclude more personal data such that “the
person and the ID number becomes identical” 1394.

Such broad approach has also been adopted in two resolutions adopted by and binding on the
Israeli government, reflecting its understanding of the term ‘data.’ One of them concerns the
right to public access to documents in government databases 1395. It exempts personal
‘identifiable data’ from the government’s obligation to grant access, and personal ‘identifiable
data’ is defined broadly to include un-identified data that can be potentially identifiable if
combined with additional data. The second resolution concerns the promotion of “Digital
Health” and requires certain safeguards to be provided in future legislation in this field1396.
Some of these safeguards are tailored depending on the level of identifiability of the data
concerned.



1386
     For a person's address as part of his private affairs, see AdminA 2820/13 Rosenberg v. Enforcement and
Collection Authority, 67(1) 1 (2014), para 23. In AdminC 67403-01-19 Har-Shemesh v. Freedom of Information
Law Officer (published in Nevo, 7.4.2019), it was held that a person's mobile phone number is at the heart of his
private affairs.
1387
     CA 439/88 Registrar of Databases v. Moshe Ventura 48(3) PD 808 (1994).
1388
     CA 27045-11-11 Yanusov v. Pelephone Communication Ltd. (published in Nevo, 14 May 2014).
1389
     AdminA 7678/16 Drucker v. Freedom of Information Law Officer in the Prime Minister's Office (published
in Nevo, 7. August 2017)
1390
     CivC (Tel Aviv Magistrate) 27044-10-11 Schwartz v. Nachum (Published in Nevo, 28. July 2014).
1391
     Article 7 PPL. See also para. 6.2-6.3 of Guideline no. 1/2017 of the Database Registrar regarding the
"Application of the Provisions of the Privacy Protection Law on the Right to Access Voice Recordings and
Other Digital Data”.
1392
     AdminC 244867-02-11 I.D.I Insurance Company Ltd. v. Ministry of Justice the Israeli Law, PPA – the
Registrar of Databases (Jul. 7, 2012), as upheld by the Israeli Supreme Court in Admin A 7043/12 I.D.I.
Insurance Company Ltd. v. Ministry of Justice the Israeli Law, PPA – the Registrar of Databases, 15 January
2014.
1393
     The Supreme Court of Israel is the country's highest judicial authority and has the authority to issue
definitive rulings on the interpretation of the law. Such rulings are considered a binding source of law.
1394
     HCJ 6824/07 Adel Manna v. Tax Authority, 10 December 2010.
1395
     Government Resolution 1933 regarding ‘open data’ of the government’s databases, 30. August 2016.
1396
     Government Resolution 2733 regarding the promotion of Digital Health, 11 June 2017.

                                                      184
Finally, such broad interpretation has also been reflected in Directives and Opinions issued by
the PPA. According to PPA Directive No. 4/2012, the provisions of Chapter B of the PPL
apply to identified or identifiable data about a person. In the context of security and
surveillance cameras, the PPA’s interpretation , in line with Directive No. 4/2012, is that the
use of such cameras in the public domain and the storage of the footage captured by these
cameras constitute a database, even if the identity of the people appearing in the footage is
unknown to the camera owner, in light of the possibility to cross-reference data from different
databases, such as the camera owner's client database 1397. In an opinion issued in December
2022 1398, the PPA quoted the opinion of Israel’s Attorney General filed in the Greenberg case,
in which it was asserted that the provisions of the Privacy Protection Law apply to data “as
long as it is possible by reasonable means to identify the data subject”. The Attorney General
further stated that “data should be treated as identifiable data about a person, as long as it is
possible, with reasonable effort, to identify the data subject (the client). In this context, one
should take into account the possibility of re-identifying the data subjects, even when the data
is supposed to be anonymous” 1399. In addition, the PPA’s opinion of December 2022 quoted
the Israeli Supreme Court in the Gottesmann case, where it ruled that “[e]ven information that
is shown anonymously might establish a connection with a specific person. […] it is therefore
not necessary for a person's name or picture to appear alongside the publication; it suffices for
it to be possible by some means to connect the information with a specific person by “reverse
engineering” 1400. This is thus an approach which is similar to the one to be carried out under
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR) 1401.

In addition, since the adoption of the adequacy decision, several of the data protection
principles provided by the PPL have been further clarified through case law, guidance of the
PPA, or the adoption of regulations.

As regards the principle of lawfulness, the Israeli data protection regime requires that the
collection and processing of personal data is made on the basis of the data subject’s consent or
based on an authorisation by law 1402. Importantly, the conditions for obtaining an individual’s

1397
     See also Paragraph 2.7, PPA Directive no. 4/2012 “The use of security and surveillance cameras and the
databases of the footage captured by them”, and paragraphs 9-10 in the opinion attached thereto, both available
at: https://www.gov.il/he/departments/policies/surveillance_cameras_guidelines.
1398
     Privacy Protection Authority Legal Opinion “What are ‘Data’ and ‘Information on a Person’s Private
Affairs’ According to the Privacy Protection Law”, 20 December 2022, available at:
https://www.gov.il/BlobFolder/rfp/information_definition_public_hearing/en/PPA's%20Opinion%20-
%20What%20are%20Data%20and%20Information%20on%20a%20Person's%20Private%20Affairs.pdf.
1399
     Paragraphs 40 and 46 in the Attorney General's opinion of 29 April 2018 in CivC 22141-03-15 Greenberg v.
Cellcom (judgment of 5.3.2020).
1400
          CA      1697/11       Gottesman        v.     Vardi,      23       January      2013,     available      at:
https://versa.cardozo.yu.edu/opinions/gottesman-v-vardi.
1401
     Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).
1402
     With respect to consent, Chapter A PPL prohibits infringements of privacy without the individual’s consent
and thus recognises that consent can be a legitimate ground for the processing of personal data. Moreover, the
information requirement set out in Article 11 PPL stipulates that where data is collected from an individual, the
individual needs to be informed whether (s)he is under a legal obligation to provide the information, or whether
the provision of the information depends on the individual’s consent. Pursuant to Article 3 PPL, consent must be
informed. Article 35 PPL stipulates that “the provisions of this Law shall not derogate from the provisions of any
other Law”. From this provision, as well as from case law, it follows that the collection and processing of
personal data can also be based on an authorization by a law. The Israeli Supreme Court has clarified with
respect to public authorities that according to the principle of ‘legality of authority’ each administrative authority

                                                        185
consent have been further developed in case law of the Israeli courts, aligning them more
closely with the conditions required by EU law. In Isakov Inbar v. The State of Israel, the
Commissioner for Women Labor Law 1403, the court clarified that the monitoring of an
employee’s email account requires the employee’s explicit, specific, informed and freely
given consent to the infringement of privacy. With respect to a purely private email account,
the court held that in view of the inherent power asymmetry in the employer-employee
relationship, it had to be presumed that any consent to the monitoring of such an account had
not been given freely, so that such monitoring activities could not be based on consent alone,
but could take place only pursuant to a court order. The case law further specified the concept
of freely given consent, stressing that consent would not be freely given in case of any
coercion, whether direct or indirect, such as the sanctioning of an employee 1404. It also set out
the requirements for appropriately informing an individual, notably that the information to the
individual would have to be clear and include all relevant details, such as the nature of the
data collected, the applicable retention period, where the data would be stored and who would
have access to it, how it would be secured etc.

The purpose limitation principle is recognised both in Chapter A and in Chapter B of the PPL.
In Chapter A, Section 2(9) PPL sets out that the “use or passing of information on a person’s
private affairs for a purpose other than which was provided” in the absence of the individual’s
consent constitutes an infringement of privacy, as well as a felony under Section 5 PPL and a
civil wrong under Section 4 PPL. As mentioned above, the term ‘a person’s private affairs’
has been interpreted broadly by Israeli courts 1405, thus ensuring a wide scope of application
for the purpose limitation principle. In Chapter B PPL, Section 8(b) PPL stipulates that “no
person shall use the data in a database which must be registered under this Section, except for
the purposes for which the database was established”. The purpose limitation principle has
been upheld also by Israeli courts, for example in the IDI case 1406, in which it was ruled that
data obtained by a company in connection with a foreclosure could not be used for the
purpose of assessing the individual’s eligibility for car insurance, as such use violated the
purpose limitation provisions of the PPL.


must act solely within the powers vested in it by law. When an administrative act may lead to an infringement of
individual rights, there must be a clear and explicit legal authority in primary or secondary legislation allowing
this act, and the legislative authority must comply with the Basic law: Human Dignity and Liberty, see PCA
2558/16 Jane Doe v. Compensation Officer - Ministry of Defence (5 November 2017).
1403
     National Labor Court 90/08 Tali Isakov Inbar v. The State of Israel, the Commissioner for Women Labor
Law (Feb. 8, 2011).
1404
     Collective Dispute Appeal 7541-04-14 The New Workers’ General Federation v. the Kalanswa Municipality
(May 5, 2017).
1405
     ‘Information on a person’s private affairs’ has been interpreted to cover any data related to the private life,
e.g., name, address, telephone number, place of work, identity, friends, relations with spouse and family, see CA
439/88 Registrar of Databases v. Moshe Ventura 48(3) PD 808 (1994. In a later Supreme Court ruling, AdminA
398/07 The Movement for Freedom of Information v. The State of Israel – Tax Authority 63(1) PD 284 (2008),
the Court considered with respect to these items that the decision whether they are considered as ‘a person’s
private affairs’ in accordance with the provisions of the Privacy Protection Law should be examined in each case
according to its circumstances and its context, and with the aspiration to attain the right to privacy, while at the
same time not causing a substantial violation of other rights, such as the freedom of speech, accessibility of the
public to information and more. see AdminA 9341/05 The Movement for Freedom of Information v. the
Governmental Companies Authority (May 5, 2009).
1406
     AdminC (TA) 244867-02-11 I.D.I Insurance Company Ltd. v. Ministry of Justice the Israeli Law, PPA – the
Registrar of Databases (Jul. 7, 2012), as upheld by the Israeli Supreme Court, AdminA 7043/12 I.D.I. Insurance
Company Ltd. v. Ministry of Justice the Israeli Law, PPA – the Registrar of Databases (Jan. 15, 2014).

                                                       186
The principle of data security and confidentiality is reflected in Articles 16, 17, 17A and 17B
of the PPL. Article 7 PPL defines ‘data security’ as the “protection of the integrity of data, or
protection of the data from exposure, use or copying, all when done without due permission”.
Article 16 PPL protects the confidentiality of data by setting out that data may not be
disclosed by an employee, manager or possessor of a database except in certain specific
circumstances, such as for performing his work or pursuant to a court order. Article 17
specifies that a database owner, the possessor of a database and the manager of a database are
each responsible for the security of a database. Article 17A provides for access restrictions in
order to prevent unauthorised access to databases, and Article 17B obliges specific bodies 1407
to appoint a Security Officer, who is also personally responsible for the security of the
database. Moreover, since the adoption of the adequacy decision, the Data Security
Regulations have established mechanisms aimed at strengthening data security in both the
private and public sectors by making it part of the management routines of all organizations
processing personal data, and more specifically, by creating awareness, accountability and
working procedures. In particular, the Data Security Regulations classify databases into
different categories according to the level of risk created by the processing activity. This level
of risk is defined by the data sensitivity, the number of data subjects and the number of
authorised access holders. The duties of the database owners are determined in accordance
with the level of risk. Among others, the Data Security Regulations contain obligations
concerning the mapping of data processing activities 1408, data security protocol 1409, “data
security risk evaluation” 1410, physical security measures 1411 and access controls 1412, as well as
an obligation to notify severe “data incidents” to the PPA, and to the data subjects if so
instructed by the PPA 1413.

In addition, several data protection principles that were previously recognised only implicitly
in the PPL have been codified in the Privacy Protection Regulations and/or the Data Security
Regulations and have thus been significantly strengthened after the adoption of the adequacy
decision.

While the principle of data quality/data accuracy was previously not set out as an independent
principle, but recognised implicitly in the context of the right to rectification provided in
Article 14 PPL 1414, for data that has been transferred to Israel from the EU, Regulation 5 of

1407
     Public bodies, bodies that operate several databases and bodies that carry out data processing with specific
risks for the individual, see Article 17B PPL.
1408
     Article 5 Data Security Regulations.
1409
     Article 4 Data Security Regulations.
1410
     Article 5 Data Security Regulations.
1411
     Article 6 Data Security Regulations.
1412
     Articles 7, 8, 9 and 10 Data Security Regulations.
1413
     Article 11 Data Security Regulations.
1414
     Article 14 PPL stipulates that “A person who reviewed the data about himself, and found it to be incorrect,
incomplete, unclear or not up to date, may request the database owner, and if he is a foreign resident – the
possessor, to correct or delete the data.” The principle of data quality and data accuracy has also been recognised
by Israeli courts. In one case, the respondents had failed to make it clear in their application to register a database
“whether and how a person could ascertain whether his name appears in the database, and request that the data
be corrected or deleted from the database; in addition, no deletion and updating mechanism, for the passage of
time, has been established within the database”. The Supreme Court justice found that “a correction and
adjustment mechanism on the one hand, and a deletion and updating mechanism on the other, are essential to
ensure the accuracy and reliability of the data compiled and ensure the mitigation of the risk of harm to both the
relevant individuals and to the public.”, see CA 439/88 Registrar of Databases v. Moshe Ventura 48(3) PD 808
(1994).

                                                         187
the Privacy Protection Regulations now explicitly requires the database controller to have in
place an organizational, technological or other mechanism, the purpose of which is to ensure
that the data in the database is correct, complete, clear and updated. If the database controller
finds, on the basis of, inter alia, the abovementioned mechanism, that the database contains
data that is not correct, complete, clear or updated, he is required to take reasonable measures
in the circumstances of the case for the purpose of rectifying or deleting the data.

Also the principle of limited data retention has been reinforced through the adoption of the
Privacy Protection and the Data Security Regulations 1415. For data that has been transferred to
Israel from the EEA, Regulation 4 of the Privacy Protection Regulations requires the database
controller to have in place an organizational, technological or other mechanism, the purpose
of which is to ensure that the database does not include data that is no longer necessary for the
purpose for which it was collected or retained, or for any other purpose for which it may be
retained in accordance with any law (referred to as data that is not necessary). If the database
controller finds, on the basis of, inter alia, the abovementioned mechanism, that data that is
not necessary is kept in the database, he is required to delete the said data at the earliest
opportunity in the circumstances of the case 1416. In addition, Regulation 2(c) of the Data
Security Regulations provides that database owners must annually examine if the data stored
in their databases is excessive for the purpose of each database.

Finally, the principle of transparency was so far only reflected in the PPL through the right to
information. Article 11 PPL provides that if data is collected from a person for use in a
database, this person needs to be informed about whether (s)he is under a legal obligation to
provide the data or whether the provision of data depends on his or her volition and consent,
about the purpose of the collection and the recipient of the data, as well as the purpose of any
further sharing of the data. To enhance transparency for data subjects in the EU whose
personal data is transferred to Israel, Regulation 6 of the Privacy Protection Regulations now
imposes additional transparency requirements. A database controller in Israel who received
data about a person is required to provide the said person, whether directly or indirectly
through the entity that provided the data from the EU, with information about the identity of
the database controller and the database manager, their addresses and contact information, the
purpose of the data transfer, the type of the data that was transferred, and the data subject
rights that are available in the Israeli framework 1417. The information must be provided as

1415
     Previously, the principle of limited data retention could only be implied from Article 8(b) PPL. This
provision sets out that data in databases can only be used for the purposes for which the database was
established, which could imply that data can no longer be used (including the storage) if the use (including the
storage) is no longer necessary for the purpose for which the database was established.
1416
     Pursuant to Regulation 4(c) of the Privacy Protection Regulations, the obligation to delete is subject to
exemptions for purposes similar to those for which an exemption to the right to deletion is granted also under EU
law. In addition, these exemptions can only be invoked to the extent necessary and proportionate. More
specifically, the obligation to delete, to the extent necessary and proportionate in the circumstances of the case,
does not apply if actions that assure that it is impossible, by applying reasonable measures, to identify the data
subject, were performed with respect to the said data, or to the extent the use of the data is necessary and
proportionate for exercising the right of freedom of expression including the public's right to know, protecting a
public interest, including for archiving purposes, scientific research or statistical research, conducting a legal
proceeding or ensuring debt collection, addressing fraud, theft or other incidents affecting the integrity of the
data processing operation, or for fulfilling an obligation resulting from an international agreement to which the
Government of Israel is a party.
1417
     The right to deletion pursuant to Regulation 2 of the Privacy Protection Regulations, the right to access
pursuant to Article 13 PPL, and the right to correction pursuant to Article 14 PPL.

                                                       188
soon as possible after receiving the data and no later than one month as of the date of
receiving the data 1418. In this way, the Privacy Protection Regulations ensure that individuals
in the EU continue to be informed of the specific controllers processing their information and
are able to exercise their rights vis-à-vis the relevant entities.

In addition to the strengthening of data protection principles, the protections for special
categories of personal data in Israel have been reinforced since the adoption of the adequacy
decision. The PPL already offered stronger protections 1419 for data on the personality,
intimate affairs 1420, state of health, economic state, opinions, and beliefs. In addition, in the
Kalanswa case, the court ruled that biometric fingerprints taken in the workplace constitute
sensitive personal data and confirmed also more generally that biometric data would normally
be considered sensitive data 1421. Moreover, the Israeli Genetic Data Law, 5761-2000 (Genetic
Data Law) recognises the sensitivity of genetic data and sets out additional safeguards for
their processing 1422. For instance, consent to the processing of genetic data must be given in
writing and there are specific rules for the storage of genetic data 1423. The above is also
reflected in the Data Security Regulations, which refer to biometric and genetic data as data
with special sensitivity that require at least the medium level of protection 1424. Finally, for

1418
     See Regulation 6(a) and (b) of the Privacy Protection Regulations. Regulation 6(c) of the Privacy Protection
Regulations allows certain limited and qualified exceptions to these additional transparency obligations that are
essentially equivalent to those provided under EU data protection legislation. More specifically, the obligation to
inform, to the extent necessary and proportionate in the circumstances of the case, does not apply (1) if the
database controller has reasonable grounds to assume that the particulars of the information to be provided are
already known to the data subject, (2) if the contact information of the data subject is not known to the database
controller, or the implementation of the duty to inform involves an unreasonable burden on the database
controller, taking also into account the possibility to cooperate with the data exporter, (3) if there is a duty of
confidentiality prescribed by law or a prohibition by law on the disclosure of the data, (4) if there is a legal
provision that regulates the disclosure of the information to be provided, (5) if exercising the duty to inform may
harm a person's life, health or body, (6) if exercising the duty to inform may harm journalistic activities or reveal
the source of information for journalistic activity, or (7) if exercising the duty to inform will affect the rights of a
person in a degree exceeding the harm caused to the data subject as a result of failure to disclose the information
to be provided.
1419
     In accordance with Article 8(c)(2) PPL, databases containing data that is considered sensitive pursuant to
Article 7 PPL must always be registered. In addition, the Data Security Regulations require an increased level of
data security for databases that contain sensitive data, see Article 1(3) First schedule to the Data Security
Regulations.
1420
     As confirmed by the case law of Israeli courts, data concerning a natural person’s sex life or sexual
orientation is covered by the category of data on intimate affairs. See for example Supreme Court ruling in HCJ
3809/08 The Association for Civil Rights in Israel v. the Israel Police (2012), where the Court found, in relation
to Criminal Procedure Law, that “surveillance of a person, even if for a criminal investigation, may reveal other
details, the knowledge of which is a violation of a person's privacy and his intimate affairs, such as health
problems, consumer habits, sexual orientation, and so on.”
1421
     Collective Dispute Appeal 7541-04-14 The New Workers’ General Federation v. the Kalanswa Municipality
(May 5, 2017).
1422
     See Articles 1, 11, 12, 15, 16 and 28G of the Genetic Data Law.
1423
     Articles 11 and 15 Genetic Data Law.
1424
     Article 1(3)(c) and (g), First Schedule to the Data Security Regulations. The Data Security Regulations lay
down detailed obligations on how to maintain a record of accesses to a database and of events such as security
breaches, on the obligation for controllers and processors (including the obligation to detail in written
agreements between controllers and processors the purpose of processing, the type of processing operations
authorised, the obligation for the processor to return or destroy data at the end of the processing), on periodical
auditing, risk evaluations and penetrability tests, the obligation for a controller to adopt written security
procedures binding all employees and organs of their organisation, to vet the qualification of employees and train
them on data protection legislation and requirements before granting them access to a database (for databases of
medium or high security level, training must be repeated periodically), to take measures to make sure only
permitted authorized users use the database and database systems, the duties of data security officers, as well as
technical aspects such as limiting the possibility to connect mobile devices to databases, or to connect database

                                                         189
data that has been transferred to Israel from the EU, Regulation 7 of the Privacy Protection
Regulations extends the protections for sensitive data also to data regarding a person’s ethnic
origin and to data regarding trade union membership, so that all data considered sensitive
under EU law now benefit from additional protections also under the Israeli framework.

Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, also the data protection rights of individuals
have been strengthened in several ways.

The right of access is guaranteed in Article 13(a) PPL, which sets out that “every person is
entitled to review, in person, or through a representative authorised by him in writing, or
through his legal guardian, any data regarding such person which is kept in a database 1425.”
The PPA has further clarified this right in a guideline issued in 2017 1426. This guideline
notably specifies that the right of access should be granted with respect to data in any format
or file type, including video, text messaging or voice recordings. The guideline also confirms
that data subjects benefit from the right of access with respect to data stored by their service
provider. Finally, the guideline clarifies that under the right of access, data subjects should
have the right to receive data in a digital format that may be read, heard or viewed by publicly
available software, via email, secure website or any other digital means. In the past, the Israeli
Supreme Court had already aligned the scope of the right of access in Israel with the scope of
this right in the EU legal framework, interpreting the right of access as including the right of
the data subject to receive a copy of the data 1427.

The right to rectification is provided for by Article 14 PPL, according to which a person who
reviewed data about himself and found it to be incorrect, incomplete, unclear, or not up to
date, may request the database owner to correct or delete the data. Pursuant to Article 14(c)
PPL, the database owner may refuse to comply with such request for rectification, but the
PPA’s Directive No. 2/2012 clarifies that in view of the explicit language of Articles 13, 14
and 31A(4) PPL, a refusal to grant the right to rectification under this Directive with no
grounds provided or not made in good faith will be considered by the PPA as a violation of
that right 1428. Moreover, pursuant to Article 15 PPL, an individual can appeal before a Court
the refusal to grant the right to rectification 1429. Finally, for data that has been transferred to
Israel from the EU, the Privacy Protection Regulations require the database controller to have
in place an organizational, technological or other mechanism to ensure that the data in the

systems to the internet or a public network. Also, the proposed draft Privacy Protection Bill (Amendment No.
14) that would amend the PPL recognises biometric and genetic data as categories of ‘especially sensitive data’.
1425
      In the Israeli legal framework, the right of access can – subject to certain conditions and limitations - be
restricted for data in specific databases that are listed in Article 13(e) PPL. For instance, the rules on access to
data in databases may be disapplied with respect to a database of a security agency, to a database of the Prisons
Service, to a database of a tax authority, or where the State security, its foreign relations or the provisions of any
law require that data of a person is not disclosed to him. The conditions for and limitations to the application of
these restrictions are described in Section 2.2.1. Additional rules with respect to the right of access are set out in
the Privacy Protection Regulations (Terms of Review of Data and Procedures on Appeal for Refusal of Request
for Review) – 5741-1981). The Regulations provide the conditions for review of personal data (Articles 1 and 3),
the payment method (Article 6 sets the amount of 20 Old Shekels– less than 1€) and the legal procedure
challenging the rejection of such request before a magistrate court (Articles 8, 9, 10).
1426
     PPA Guideline No. 1/2017 regarding the scope of the PPL on the right to access voice recordings, video and
digital data, available at: https://www.gov.il/he/departments/policies/right_of_access.
1427
     HCJ 7256/95 Fishler v. Israel Police Commissioner, IsrSC 50(5) 1, (1996).
1428
     PPA Directive No. 2/2012, available at: https://www.gov.il/he/departments/policies/recruitment_guidelines.
1429
     See also Article 8 of the Protection of Privacy Regulations (Terms of Review of Data and Procedures on
Appeal for Refusal of Request for Review).

                                                        190
database is correct, complete, clear and updated, and to take reasonable measures for the
purpose of rectifying or deleting the data if the database controller finds that the database
contains data that is not correct, complete, clear or updated 1430.

The right to deletion of personal data in the Israeli system was so far only available under
Article 14 PPL, i.e., in cases where data is found to be incorrect, incomplete, unclear or not up
to date. In addition, data subjects could obtain the deletion of their data by filing a complaint
with the PPA 1431 or by bringing a case before court 1432. With the adoption of the Privacy
Protection Regulations, the right to deletion has been significantly strengthened for data that
has been transferred to Israel from the EU. Regulation 3(a) of the Privacy Protection
Regulations explicitly requires the database controller to delete data on request of the data
subject if the data was created, obtained, accrued or collected in contravention of the
provisions of any law, if the further use of the data is in violation of the law, or if the data is
no longer necessary for the purposes for which it was created, obtained, accrued or collected.
Pursuant to Regulation 3(b) of the Privacy Protection Regulations, a request to delete data
may only be refused in certain limited and specific situations and subject to the requirements
of necessity and proportionality 1433.

With respect to the transfer of personal data abroad, certain requirements in the Privacy
Protection (Transfer of Databases Abroad) Regulations (Transfer Regulations) 1434 have been
further interpreted and clarified by the PPA. In addition, the Data Security Regulations have
established additional accountability obligations for controllers with respect to international
transfers.


1430
     Regulation 5 of the Privacy Protection Regulations.
1431
     If the PPA finds that the PPL or other regulations promulgated thereunder have been violated, it can act to
stop or prevent the violation. For instance, in a series of decisions against data traders and their clients taken
between 2015 and 2017, the PPA ordered the deletion of data that had been illegally obtained from the Israeli
population registry and other sources, see https://www.gov.il/he/departments/news/data_rings and
https://www.gov.il/he/Departments/news/teleall. The PPA may also decide, if appropriate, to refer the case to a
court.
1432
     Article 29(a)(4) PPL provides that the Court may order “the destruction of data which was illegally received,
or prohibition of use of said data, or the surplus data as defined in section 23E, or it may give any other order
with regards to the data.” For example, in the Kalansawa case the Court ordered the deletion of the municipality
employees’ biometric data, after having held that the data had been unlawfully collected, CDA 7541-04-14 The
New Workers’ General Federation v. the Kalanswa Municipality (5 May 2017). In addition, Israeli courts
ordered the destruction of data on the basis of Article 29 PPL for instance in CivC (Jerusalem Magistrate)
21933-11-17 Shorshan v. Kerem Nevot Ltd. (PBC) (published in Nevo, 24.6.2020) and CrimC (Tel Aviv
Magistrate) 19578-11-14 The State of Israel v. A (published in Nevo, 27.7.2016.
1433
     Similarly to the situations in which a request for deletion may be refused under the EU legal framework, a
database controller in Israel may refuse a request to delete data to the extent the use of the data is necessary and
proportionate for exercising the right of freedom of expression, including the public's right to know, for
performing a legal obligation or exercising an authority by operation of the law, for protecting a public interest,
including for archival purposes, scientific research or statistical research, for conducting a legal proceeding or
ensuring debt collection, for addressing fraud, theft or other incidents affecting the integrity of the data
processing operations, or for fulfilling an obligation resulting from an international agreement to which the
Government of Israel is a party. See Regulation 3(b) of the Privacy Protection Regulations.
1434
     Article 1 of the Transfer Regulations provides that the transfer abroad of data from databases in Israel is
prohibited, unless the law of the country to which the data is transferred ensures a level of protection that is not
lower than the level of protection provided for by Israeli law, and provided that certain principles listed in the
Regulations apply. It is the responsibility of database controllers to assess the level of data protection and the
application of the listed principles in the country where the data is received. Article 2 of the Transfer Regulations
provides for a limited and exhaustive list of situations in which data may be transferred abroad even if the law of
the country to which the data is transferred does not ensure an equivalent level of protection.

                                                        191
As regards Article 3 of the Transfer Regulations, which sets out the safeguards that need to be
ensured for data that is transferred abroad 1435, the PPA has clarified in a legal opinion1436 that
the scope and content of the guarantee required by that Article can include different but
sufficient assurances to ensure the privacy of the data subjects, taking into account the scope
of the data, its sensitivity and other relevant circumstances, even if these assurances are not
completely identical to the Israeli privacy and data protection legislation.

In addition, in an effort to align the Israeli transfer regime more closely with the respective
rules at EU and international level, the PPA clarified that Article 3 should not be understood
as prohibiting the onward transfer of data that has been received from Israel, provided that (1)
the owner of the database in Israel from which the data was originally transferred had given
written consent to the onward transfer to a third party, (2) that the onward transfer itself was
done lawfully, i.e., based on consent of the data subjects or authorised by law; and (3) if the
data were transferred to the third party directly from Israel, the transfer would comply with
the conditions set out in Article 1 or Article 2 of the Transfer Regulations so that some
continuity of protection is ensured.

As regards accountability requirements, the Data Security Regulations compel the data
controller to define in the “database definitions document” (which describes key aspects of
the database and the processing activities carried out) also the details of a possible transfer
abroad 1437. In particular, the database definitions document needs to specify “details of
transferring the database or material parts thereof outside the State borders or using the data
outside the State borders, the purpose of transfer, destination country, manner of transfer and
identity of the transferee”.

       1.2. Oversight, enforcement and redress

Oversight and enforcement of the PPL is ensured by the PPA 1438. While being part of the
administrative structure of the Israeli Ministry of Justice 1439, the PPA carries out its functions


1435
     Pursuant to Article 3 of the Transfer Regulations, in any case of transfer of personal data abroad (both under
Article 1 and Article 2 of the Transfer Regulations), the database controller must ensure that the recipient of the
data undertakes in writing to apply adequate measures in order to protect the privacy of the data subjects and
guarantee that the data shall be transferred to no other person, whether in the recipient’s country or in another.
1436
     PPA Draft Legal Opinion - Article 3 of the Privacy Protection (Transfer of Data to Databases Abroad)
Regulations,                             5761-2001,                            available                           at:
https://www.gov.il/BlobFolder/rfp/transfer_of_data_abroad_interpretation_draft/he/transfer%20of%20data%20a
broad%20interpretationdraft.pdf.
1437
     Article 2(a)(4) of the Data Security Regulations.
1438
     The PPL foresees that oversight over the protection of privacy is carried out by the so-called Registrar.
Pursuant to Article 10(c) PPL, the Registrar is responsible for supervising compliance with the provisions of the
PPL (i.e., Chapter A and Chapter B of the PPL) and of the regulations thereunder. By resolution of the
government of Israel of 2006 (available at: https://www.gov.il/he/departments/policies/2006_des4660), the
Registrar was integrated into the Israeli Law, Information and Technology Authority (ILITA), which was created
by that same decision. The role of the Head of ILITA was assigned to the Registrar. In order to better reflect the
Authority’s activities and increase public awareness as to its mission, ILITA was renamed as Privacy Protection
Authority in 2017. The Head of the PPA is appointed by the Government and, pursuant to Article 7 PPL, needs
to be a person at least qualified to be appointed as a Magistrates Court judge. In line with the relevant applicable
rules, the Minister of Justice selects the candidate for the position of the Head of the PPA, but he can only select
a candidate from among those that have been recommended by a ‘search committee’. The Civil Service
Commissioner’s Office determines and publishes the characteristics of the position and the conditions to be
fulfilled by the candidates, such as qualifications and professional experience. The search committee then
evaluates the candidates’ qualifications and capabilities under the equal opportunity principle underlying public

                                                        192
independently. Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, this independence has been
strengthened.

More specifically, as formally clarified by a Resolution adopted by the Israeli government in
October 2022 and its accompanying Explanatory Notes 1440, the PPA is “independent in
exercising the powers vested in the Head of the Authority for performing its duties”, which
notably means that it “is not subordinate to the ministerial level or to intervention from
outside the Authority.” Moreover, the Government Resolution clarifies that within the
Ministry of Justice’s budget, the PPA’s operational budget must be managed separately.

In addition to its independence, also the PPA’s role and powers have been reinforced since the
adoption of the adequacy decision. First, the PPA has been equipped with additional
powers 1441 under the Data Security Regulations. Pursuant to Article 11(d) of the Data Security
Regulations, in cases of severe security events 1442 the database owner is required to
immediately notify the PPA and report on the measures taken following the event. The PPA is
entitled to order a database owner to notify the security event to any data subject who may be
harmed by the event. Moreover, in specific circumstances the PPA may impose additional
requirements on a database in order to strengthen its security or may exempt certain databases
from specific provisions 1443. Second, to reflect its increasing role and its wide-ranging tasks,
the PPA’s budget and number of staff members have increased significantly 1444. Third, Israeli
courts have clarified the PPA's powers to issue guidelines and enforce them, stressing that
these powers are to be construed broadly and are not limited to what is set forth explicitly in
the law. According to the courts, the PPA is entitled to exercise its discretion in an individual
case or according to a general policy determined in accordance with the professional
interpretation of the PPL. Thus, it is within the authority of the PPA to issue guidelines and




tenders. Once the Minister of Justice has selected a candidate among those recommended by the search
committee, the Israeli government needs to approve the appointment.
1439
     Pursuant to Article 10(d) and (e), the Minister of Justice is required to establish, with approval by the
Knesset Constitution, Law and Justice Committee, a supervisory unit to supervise the databases, their
registration and the data security therein and the Registrar shall head that supervisory unit.
1440
     Independence of the Privacy Protection Authority, Government Resolution No. 1890 of 2 October 2022
(Government Resolution No. 1890), available at: https://www.gov.il/he/departments/policies/dec1890-2022. An
unofficial English translation of the Government Resolution No. 1890 is available at:
https://www.gov.il/en/departments/legalInfo/resolution1890. In the Israeli system, government resolutions are
binding on all parts of the government. Government Resolution No. 1890 also specifies the qualification required
for being appointed as Head of the PPA, i.e., to be qualified to be appointed as District Court Judge (rather than
as Magistrate Court Judge, as provided by Article 7 PPL).
1441
     Under the PPL, in order to carry out its functions, the staff of the PPA can notably request relevant
information and documents from any person involved, as well as enter, search and seize any object in any place
for which there are reasonable grounds to believe that a database is operated therein. The PPA can act on the
basis of individual complaints or on its own initiative. If a possessor or owner of a database has infringed any
provision of the PPL or fails to comply with a demand from the PPA, the PPA may suspend or cancel the
registration of a database, and thus suspend or prohibit the processing of data in this database. See Article 10
PPL.
1442
     Pursuant to Article 11(a) of the Data Security Regulations, a security incident is defined as any event that
raises concern for the breach of data integrity, the unauthorized use of data or a deviation from authorization.
1443
     Article 20 of the Data Security Regulations.
1444
     According to information provided by the Israeli authorities, the PPA’s budget had increased by 65% to 15
million NIS in May 2019 and was further increased to more than 17 million NIS in 2022. Moreover, between
2016 and 2023 the PPA received additional 33 staff members.

                                                      193
corrective orders to database controllers, processors and managers, reflecting the PPA's
interpretation to the provisions of the law 1445.

As regards possibilities for individuals to obtain redress, the Israeli system continues to offer
various avenues. A person claiming data about him or her was used contrary to the PPL may
lodge a complaint with the PPA 1446 and may apply directly to court if a request for access or
rectification is refused 1447. Moreover, a person claiming data about him was used contrary to
the provisions under the PPL, can apply to the court with a civil tort lawsuit when the
defendants are civil entities 1448. When the defendant is a government agency, the individual
may file an administrative petition, either to the Supreme Court or to the Administrative
Court. 1449. Where a violation of the PPL constitutes a criminal offence, individuals can also
submit a criminal complaint or a private criminal indictment against another individual
pursuant to Article 68 of the Israeli Criminal Procedure Law (combined version) 5742-1982.
In the Israeli system, individuals can also obtain damages for violations of the PPL1450.
Finally, in addition to any other penalty and relief, the court may, in a criminal or civil trial
for infringement of any provision of the PPL, issue an order, for instance on the destruction of
the information that was illegally received or on the prohibition of the use of such
information 1451.

The PPA plays a very active role in the interpretation and enforcement of data protection law,
both when it comes to its engagement with stakeholders and when exercising its oversight
role. Its activities include the issuing of opinions and guidelines, enforcement actions and the
promotion of legislation1452. Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, the PPA issued
numerous guidelines, position papers and legal opinions. Among other, it published
guidelines on the Data Security Regulations, on the right to access, on the use of surveillance
cameras in the public domain, on workplace surveillance, on the use of outsourcing services
for data processing, on privacy protection during recruitment procedures and on the use of
voter registers during elections. Most recently, in 2022, the PPA updated its policy regarding
the receipt of reports on data security incidents, requiring serious incidents to be reported

1445
      AdminC (TA) 24867-02-11 I.D.I. Insurance Company Ltd. v. Ministry of Justice the Israeli Law,
Information and Technology Authority – the Registrar of Databases, (Jul. 7, 2012), Nevo Legal Database, at
para. 3 of the judgment of Judge Agmon-Gonen, that was upheld by the Supreme Court in AdminA 7043/12
I.D.I. Insurance Company Ltd. v. Ministry of Justice the Israeli Law, Information and Technology Authority –
the Registrar of Databases (Jan. 15, 2014), Nevo Legal Database.
1446
     As confirmed by Article 2(D) of Government Resolution No. 1890, one of the PPA’s duties is to “handle
public inquiries where there are grounds for harming data subjects under the Privacy Protection Law, 5741-
1981”. When an individual lodges an inquiry with the PPA, it is authorized to exercise its various enforcement
powers.
1447
     Article 15 PPL.
1448
     Pursuant to Article 4 PPL, an infringement of privacy constitutes a civil tort.
1449
     Article 15(d)(2) Basic Law: The Judiciary. Additionally, a class action may be filed against private
operators.
1450
     Where a person has been convicted of a criminal offence under Article 5 PPL, the court can order the
payment of compensation up to 50 000 NIS to the injured party, without the need for proof of damage, or a
higher compensation if the damage is proven. The same applies in a trial for civil tort, see Article 29A PPL.
1451
     Article 29(a) PPL.
1452
     For instance, to name just a few, the PPA was involved in the legislation processes concerning the Credit
Data Law, the Financial Information Services Law, 5782-2021, the Law regarding Powers of Collection and
Analysis of Passenger Name Record (PNR) Data of Passengers travelling to or from Israel, 5783-2023, the Law
on the Inclusion of Biometric Methods of Identification and Biometric Identification Data in Identification
Documents and Databases, 5770-2009, and the Income Tax Regulations (Regulations Regarding Currency
Service Providers (Temporary Provisions), 5779-2018.

                                                    194
immediately. In addition, it recommended that organizations and companies in all sectors of
the economy that process personal data should appoint privacy protection officers.

Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, the PPA has also stepped up its enforcement
activities 1453. In terms of investigations, the PPA carried out a number of audits (resulting in
specific corrective orders) in sectors that had been identified for a high risk of invasion of
privacy (for instance retail companies, insurance funds, as well as the health sector). Its
annual reports for instance show that the PPA conducted 244 audits across seven sectors in
2020, 224 audits across four sectors in 2021 and 400 audits across seven sectors in 2022. For
example, the PPA investigated the trading of sensitive health data of patients by health care
service providers, and investigated a breach of the Population Registry Database. In recent
years, the PPA imposed administrative fines on various controllers and processors 1454. In
addition, the PPA carried out important criminal investigations that were followed by criminal
proceedings, resulting in significant fines as well as imprisonment for certain individuals
involved. In particular, the PPA opened six criminal investigations in 2020 and eight in 2022.
For instance, following a joint criminal investigation by the Israel Police and the PPA, the
mayor of a medium-sized Israeli city was, among other, charged under Article 5 PPL for the
use of personal data from municipal databases for political purposes 1455. Each year, the PPA
handles a high number of security breach reports, as well as a significant number of public
inquiries (e.g., 1470 public inquiries in 2020, 1670 in 2021 and 1935 in 2022) 1456.

Finally, the PPA carries out various outreach activities, including by sending a periodic
newsletter to a large number of subscribers, by regularly organising information sessions and
events and by managing a forum for privacy awareness and training for the private and
government sectors.

2. ACCESS TO AND USE OF PERSONAL DATA TRANSFERRED FROM THE
   EUROPEAN UNION BY PUBLIC AUTHORITIES IN ISRAEL

       2.1. General legal framework

The limitations and safeguards that apply to the collection and subsequent use of personal
data by Israeli public authorities for purposes of criminal law enforcement and national
security follow from Israel’s overarching constitutional framework, the rules that apply to the
processing of personal data, as well as specific laws regulating access to data.

Access to and processing of personal information by Israeli public authorities is first of all
governed by general principles that follow from the constitutional framework, i.e., Basic Law:


1453
            See        the       annual         reports        of        the        PPA      available      at
https://www.gov.il/he/departments/publications/?OfficeId=4aadba43-3d71-4e7c-a4fe-
5bf47b723d4e&skip=30&limit=40.
1454
     For example, the PPA imposed administrative fines in a case concerning the misuse of personal data by a
political party and on an employee of the Israeli Tax Authority for repeated unauthorized use of personal data
from      the    database   of      the    Tax     Authority.     Further     information is    available  at:
https://www.gov.il/he/departments/news/fine95k.
1455
     The criminal proceedings are still ongoing under reference number CrimeC 58743-03-23.
1456
            See       the      PPA’s          annual        reports       for       2021,     available     at
https://www.gov.il/BlobFolder/reports/annual_report_2021/he/report_2021.pdf, and for 2019-2020, available at:
https://www.gov.il/BlobFolder/reports/report_2019-2020/he/anual%20report%202019-2020.pdf.

                                                    195
Human Dignity and Liberty adopted in 1992 1457. In particular, Article 7 of the Basic Law
provides that all persons have the right to privacy and to intimacy, that there shall be no entry
into the private premises of a person who has not consented thereto, that no search shall be
conducted on the private premises of a person, nor in the body or personal effects, and that
there shall be no violation of the confidentiality of conversation, or of the writings or records
of a person 1458. This article has been interpreted by Israel’s Supreme Court as providing a
comprehensive protection of the right to privacy for any individual and as including the right
to the protection of personal data 1459. Moreover, case law has confirmed the particular
importance of the protection of the right to privacy in the Israeli legal order, as an essential
precondition for a democratic regime 1460.

While the right to privacy is not absolute, any interference with this right by a public authority
must be provided for in law or on the basis of a law through an explicit authorisation therein.
A law providing for a lawful interference with the rights laid down in the Basic Law must be
consistent with the values of the State of Israel, pursue an appropriate purpose and fulfil the
principle of proportionality 1461. As regards the principle of proportionality, the Supreme Court
has clarified that any limitation of a right (such as through e.g., the processing, including the
collection, of personal data by public authorities) must meet three cumulative elements. First,
it must be suitable for the appropriate purpose that it is intended to achieve. Second, it must be
the least harmful/intrusive measure to achieve that purpose (i.e., a limitation may not be
imposed if the purpose can be achieved by another, less harmful measure). Third, there must
be a proper balance between the benefits that would be achieved by the limitation and the
harm that would be caused to the individual 1462.

In addition, the processing of personal information by Israeli public authorities (including
criminal law enforcement authorities and national security authorities) is subject to the PPL
and the Regulations adopted on the basis of the PPL 1463. The PPL and the Regulations

1457
     In the Israeli legal system, Basic Laws enjoy a constitutional character. The superiority of Basic Laws over
other laws has been upheld by Israeli courts in several instances. An overview of the relevant jurisprudence is
available at: https://main.knesset.gov.il/EN/activity/Pages/BasicLaws.aspx.
1458
     Article 7 Basic Law: Human Dignity and Liberty. Pursuant to Article 11 of the Basic Law, all governmental
authorities are bound to respect the rights established by this Basic Law.
1459
     On the inclusion of the right to personal data protection under the scope of Article 7, see the Supreme
Court’s ruling in HCJ 8070/98 ACRI v. Minister of Interior 58(4) PD 842 (2004), in which the practice of
providing financial entities and other bodies with personal data listed in the Population Registry was deemed
unlawful.
1460
     See e.g., HCJ 2109/20 Adv. Shachar Ben-Meir v. Prime Minister (26.4.2020), section 36 in the judgment of
President Chayut.
1461
     Article 8 of the Basic Law.
1462
     See e.g., CA 6821/93 Bank Mizrachi Meuchad v. Migdal Cooperative Village 49(4) PD 221 (1995); HCJ
2605/05 The Human Rights Division, Academic Center of Law and Business v. Minister of Finance 63(2) PD
545 (2009). Ad. Cr.H. 1062/21 Urich v. The State of Israel (11.01.2022), (Urich) sections 73 and 75 in the
judgment of President Chayut; Cr.Ap 1302/92 State of Israel v. Nachmias et al. P.D 49(3) 309, 353 (1995)
(Nachmias), sections 10, 13 in the judgment of Justice Bach; Telecommunication Data Law HCJ, sections 16
and 26 of President (ret.) Beinisch; HCJ 2109/20 Adv. Shachar Ben-Meir v. Prime Minister (26.4.2020) (First
ISA Authorization HCJ), sections 38-39, 43-45 in the judgment of President Chayut; Population Registry HCJ,
section 7 in the judgment of Justice (ret.) Dorner; HCJ 6732/20 Association for Civil Rights in Israel v. the
Knesset (2021) (Second ISA Authorization HCJ), section 7 in the judgment of Justice Hendel, section 18 in the
judgment of President Chayut.
1463
     See in particular the Data Security Regulations, Transfer Regulations, and Privacy Protection Regulations.
The Privacy Protection Regulations apply to data that is in a database in Israel that has been transferred from the
European Economic Area, unless the data has been transferred directly from an authority in the EEA responsible

                                                       196
adopted on its basis, as interpreted by the PPA and case law of Israeli courts, reflect the
principles of lawfulness 1464, purpose limitation 1465, accuracy 1466, transparency 1467, storage
limitation1468 and security 1469, and provide individuals with the right of access to their
personal information 1470, the right to correction 1471 and the right to deletion 1472. Finally, the
Transfer Regulations contain specific provisions on international transfers of personal
data 1473. In addition to the PPL, criminal law enforcement and national security authorities are
also subject to specific laws and regulations, which provide for limitations and safeguards
concerning the collection and use of personal data reflecting the general principles following
from the Basic Law: Human Dignity and Liberty, as further described below.

These general limitations and safeguards can be invoked by individuals before the PPA and
courts to obtain redress (see sections 2.2.4 and 2.3.4).

In addition, the Attorney General has issued a binding legal opinion further clarifying the
application of the constitutional principles of lawfulness, necessity and proportionality to the
processing of personal data by public bodies in Israel 1474. The opinion confirms that any
public authority in Israel, including law enforcement and national security authorities, may
only take a measure that interferes with the right to privacy of individuals if such measure is
provided for or authorised by law, pursues an appropriate purpose (i.e., a purpose that is
legitimate and in accordance with legal authority laid down in law), is suitable to achieve that
purpose, constitutes the least intrusive measure (compared to other available measures) and is


for national security or criminal law enforcement to a Security Agency in Israel. In addition, their application to
the use of data for the protection of national security or criminal law enforcement may be restricted, but only to
the extent necessary and proportionate for these purposes, see Regulation 2(b)(2) of the Privacy Protection
Regulations.
1464
     Chapter A PPL prohibits infringements of privacy without the individual’s consent and thus recognises that
consent can be a legitimate ground for the processing of personal data. It follows from Article 35 PPL and case
law that the collection and processing of personal data can also be based on an authorization by a law. The Israeli
Supreme Court has clarified with respect to public authorities that according to the principle of ‘legality of
authority’ each administrative authority must act solely within the powers vested in it by law. When an
administrative act may lead to an infringement of individual rights, there must be a clear and explicit legal
authority in primary legislation allowing this act, and the legislative authority must comply with the Basic law:
Human Dignity and Liberty. See PCA 2558/16 Jane Doe v. Compensation Officer - Ministry of Defence (5
November 2017).
1465
     Articles 2(9) and 8(b) PPL.
1466
     Article 14 PPL and Regulation 5 of the Privacy Protection Regulations.
1467
     Articles 11-12 PPL and Regulation 6 of the Privacy Protection Regulations.
1468
     Regulation 4 of the Privacy Protection Regulations and Regulation 2(c) of the Data Security Regulations.
1469
     Articles 16, 17, 17A and 17B PPL and Data Security Regulations.
1470
     Article 13(a) PPL.
1471
     Article 14 PPL and Regulation 5 of the Privacy Protection Regulations.
1472
     Regulation 3 of the Privacy Protection Regulations.
1473
     Articles 1, 2 and 3 of the Transfer Regulations.
1474
     See the legal opinion of the Attorney General addressed to the Director of the ISA “Re: Constitutional
principles in processing personal data in public bodies and in the Israel Security Agency in particular” (AG
Opinion),      available      at   https://www.gov.il/he/Departments/DynamicCollectors/legal-opinions-attorney-
general?skip=0&Title=%D7%A2%D7%A7%D7%A8%D7%95%D7%A0%D7%95%D7%AA%20%D7%97%D
7%95%D7%A7%D7%AA%D7%99%D7%99%D7%9D. In the Israeli legal system, pursuant to case law of the
Supreme Court, the legal opinion of the Attorney General on the interpretation of the law is binding for the entire
executive branch. See e.g., HCJ 4723/96 Atiyah v. Attorney General P.D. 56(3) 714, 731 (1997); HCJ 4267/93
Amitai – Citizens for Sound Administration and Moral Integrity – Prime Minister of Israel, P.D. 47(5) 441, 473
(1993); HCJ 5124/18 Tnuva Central Coop. for the Marketing of Agricultural Products in Israel Ltd. v. Minister
of Finance, (4.3.2019); HCJ 158/21 Physicians for Human Rights v. Minister of Public Security, (31.1.2021); see
also: Attorney General Guideline no. 1.0000 on the subject “Roles of the Attorney General.”

                                                       197
proportionate (which requires balancing the benefits that would be achieved by the measure
against the harm that would be caused to the individual) 1475.

       2.2. Access and use by Israeli public authorities for criminal law enforcement
            purposes

The Israel Police is the main law enforcement authority in Israel. Its functions and mandate
are defined in the Police Order [New Version], 5731 – 1971, whereas the rules regulating the
collection and processing of personal data by the Israel Police are enshrined in laws
implementing the Police’s general mandate and duties. Israeli law imposes a number of
safeguards and limitations on how the Police has access to and uses personal data for criminal
law enforcement purposes, and it also provides oversight and redress mechanisms in this area.
The conditions under which access to personal data can take place and the safeguards
applicable to the use of these powers are assessed in the following sections.

          2.2.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

Personal data transferred under the adequacy decision and processed by organisations in Israel
may be obtained by Israeli criminal law enforcement authorities mainly by means of
investigative measures under the Criminal Procedure Ordinance (Arrest and Search) [New
Version], 5729–1969 (Criminal Procedure Ordinance), the Criminal Procedure Law
(Enforcement Powers – Communication Data), 5768 – 2007 (Communication Data Law), and
the Wiretapping Law, 5739-1979. When collecting information on the basis of these laws,
criminal law enforcement authorities also have to comply with the Constitutional
requirements of necessity and proportionality, as developed in case law and reflected in the
AG opinion (see also section 3.2.1.).

The Criminal Procedure Ordinance provides the Israel police with a legal basis for accessing
personal data held by commercial operators through searches and seizures. It lays down
detailed rules on the scope and application of these measures, aimed at ensuring that the
interference with the rights of individuals will be limited to what is necessary for a specific
criminal investigation and proportionate to the pursued purpose. Searches may only take place
on the basis of a court-issued search warrant 1476 and the issuing of such warrant is subject to
specific procedural and substantive requirements.

More specifically, a judge may issue a search warrant only if (1) the search is necessary in
order to assure presentation of an object for purposes of any investigation, trial or other
proceeding; (2) the judge has reason to believe that the place is used for the storage or sale of
a stolen object (or that it contains an object with which or in respect of which an offense was
committed, or which was used or is intended to be used for an illegal purpose); or (3) the


1475
     Article 8 of the Basic Law, as well as case law, see e.g., CA 6821/93 Bank Mizrachi Meuchad v. Migdal
Cooperative Village 49(4) PD 221 (1995); HCJ 2605/05 The Human Rights Division, Academic Center of Law
and Business v. Minister of Finance 63(2) PD 545 (2009).
1476
     See Articles 23 and 24 Criminal Procedure Ordinance. Pursuant to Article 25 Criminal Procedure Ordinance,
warrantless searches may only take place in exceptional circumstances A policeman may search a premise if (1)
he has reasonable grounds to assume that a felony is being committed there or that a felony was committed there
recently; (2) the person in possession of the house or place asks for help from the police; (3) a person who is
there asks for the help of the police and there are grounds to assume that an offense is being committed there;
and (4) if the policeman chases a person who evades arrest or escapes from lawful custody.

                                                     198
judge has reason to believe that that an offense was committed or is intended to be committed
against a person in that place 1477. Moreover, access to computer data, irrespective of the kind
of hardware on which it is stored (e.g., including smartphones etc.) is permitted only subject
to a Court order which “details the objectives of the search and its conditions, that will be
determined in a manner that will not harm the privacy of a person in an excessive
manner.” 1478 Any search, including the search of computers, must be carried out in the
presence of two witnesses that are not policemen 1479 and the occupant of the house or place or
the person whose computer material is being searched is entitled to be present during the
search. On the basis of a search warrant, a policeman may seize any object described in the
search warrant 1480, or any other object if he has reasonable grounds to assume that an offense
was or is about to be committed with it or that it is likely to serve as evidence in a judicial
proceeding for an offense 1481. A list of objects seized is to be drawn up by the person who
conducts the search and the occupant of the house or place or the person whose computer
material is being searched shall be given a copy of the list of the objects seized 1482.

The Communication Data Law allows the Israel Police and other investigating authorities 1483
to obtain communication data, i.e., metadata 1484, from telecommunications companies. Such
data may be collected from telecommunication providers on the basis of a detailed request 1485
by an investigating authority approved by the Magistrates Court 1486, and only for the purposes
of saving or protecting the life of a person, investigating or preventing offences of the felony
or misdemeanour class 1487, determining the identity of offenders and bringing legal action

1477
     Article 23 Criminal Procedure Ordinance.
1478
     Article 23A of the Criminal Procedure Ordinance.
1479
     Article 26 Criminal Procedure Ordinance. The presence of witnesses is not compulsory where the search
cannot be performed in that manner under the circumstances of the case and because of the urgency of the
matter, where a judge permitted the search to be conducted in the absence of witnesses or where the person in
possession of the house or place where the search is conducted asks the search to be conducted in the absence of
witnesses, see Article 26(1)-(3) Criminal Procedure Ordinance.
1480
     Article 24 Criminal Procedure Ordinance.
1481
     Article 32 Criminal Procedure Ordinance.
1482
     Articles 27 and 28 Criminal Procedure Ordinance.
1483
     Pursuant to Article 1 Communication Data Law, other investigative agencies are the following: Investigating
Military Police, Internal Investigations Unit of the Military Police Corps, Policemen Investigation Division in
the Ministry of Justice, Israeli Securities Authority, Antitrust Authority, Israel Tax Authority.
1484
     In Article 1 Communication Data Law, ‘communication data’ is defined as including ‘subscriber’ data,
location data and communication traffic data. ‘Subscriber’ is defined as the recipient of telecommunication
services or owner of a telecommunications device (or facility), whereas the definition of ‘subscriber data’
encompasses data on the type of telecommunication service provided to the subscriber, the subscriber’s name,
address, ID and payment means, the address of installation of the telecommunication facility used by the
subscriber and the identifying data of the telecommunication facility in the subscriber’s possession. The content
of communications is explicitly excluded by the scope of ‘communication data’.
1485
     Pursuant to Article 3(d) Communication Data Law, the application must be filed in writing and must contain
a number of elements, including a summary of the facts, the purposes for which the communication data is
required, the identification details of the subscriber or telecommunication facility for which communication data
is sought, if known in advance, and the timeframe for which communication data is sought.
1486
     In addition, Article 6 Communication Data Law allows the Head of the Investigations and Intelligence
Division in the Israel Police to request a limited number of basic categories of personal data from telecom
companies in Israel. As this provision only allows the collection of identification data (defined in Article 1
Communication Data Law as including name, ID or corporation ID, address and phone number) from
subscribers of a telecom service in Israel, it concerns exclusively data from Israeli subscribers and does not
affect data received in Israel from controllers or processors abroad.
1487
     Article 1 Communication Data Law. Pursuant to the Penal Law, 5737 - 1977, ‘felony’ refers to an offence
punishable by a prison term of more than 3 years. A ‘misdemeanour’ refers to an offence punishable by a prison
term of 3 months to 3 years.

                                                      199
against them, as well as for the purpose of confiscation of assets according to law (for
instance in order to gather evidence of the beneficial ownership of an asset) 1488. The Court
may only grant access to such data by means of an order if the conditions provided in the law
are met, i.e., on condition that granting the authority access to the data does not harm the
privacy of the data subject in an excessive manner, and that the collection of data is carried
out only for one of the purposes specified in the law 1489. When deciding on the application,
the Court will consider, among others, the need to achieve the purposes specified in the law,
the type of communication data sought, the extent of the infringement of privacy, and the
severity of the offense. In the order, the Court sets out a timeframe during which
communication data may be obtained, which cannot exceed 30 days from the date when the
order is issued 1490.

In a situation where data is urgently needed, so that there is no time to submit an application
to the Court pursuant to the above-described procedure, for the purpose of preventing a felony
class offense or discovering its perpetrator, or for saving human life, a member of the Israel
Police or Military Police may request access to communication data for a period of maximum
24 hours without a Court order 1491. In this case, the request for this special permit is submitted
to the relevant authorised officer 1492. The authorised officer will grant such permit only upon
condition that there is an urgent need to obtain communication data for the abovementioned
purposes, and that there is no time to obtain a Court order. After having issued such a permit,
the authorised officer is required to report in writing to a higher-ranking member of their
respective police corps the reasons for issuing the permit 1493.

Importantly, all the above-mentioned provisions for the collection and use of communication
data have been examined and further clarified by the Israeli Supreme Court in the case of The
Association for Civil Rights in Israel 1494, where the Supreme Court assessed the
constitutionality of some of the provisions of the Communication Data Law. It held that, in
order to ensure the correct balance between the purpose of the law and the protection of the
right to privacy, the legal arrangements for accessing personal data provided by the law would
need to be interpreted narrowly and applied in a proportionate manner. In particular, the law
should be interpreted as allowing the authorities to access data solely for the purpose of

1488
     Article 3 Communication Data Law.
1489
     Article 3(a) Communication Data Law.
1490
     Article 3(g) Communication Data Law. Under Article 3(b) Communication Data Law, if the subscriber with
respect to whom the application for communication data is filed is subject to professional privilege by virtue of
any applicable law (including case law), the Court will not allow receiving such communication data, unless it is
convinced, based on clear elaboration in the application, that there are grounds to suspect that the professional is
involved in the offense regarding which the application was filed. In such a case, the application must indicate
that the subscriber is a person subject to professional privilege and, in the event that the Court decides to issue an
order in relation to the communication data of that person, the Court shall detail in the reasons for issuing the
order despite the circumstance of the professional privilege.
1491
     Article 4 Communication Data Law
1492
     Under Article 1 of the Communication Data Law, an authorised officer is one of the following: a police
officer from the investigations or intelligence apparatus of the Israel Police with a rank of commander and above
or a police officer who serves as commander of a national or district centre of the Police, authorized for that
purpose by the Commissioner or (2) an officer with a rank of lieutenant colonel in the Investigating Military
Police authorized by the Chief of Staff for the purpose.
1493
     See Article 4(a) and (d) Communication Data Law. Moreover, the Head of Investigation and Intelligence
Department is required to submit a report to the Attorney General once per three months concerning permits
issued on the basis of Article 4 Communication Data Law.
1494
     HCJ 3809/08 The Association for Civil Rights in Israel v. the Israel Police (May 28, 2012).

                                                        200
investigating or preventing specific offenses or offenders, and not for general intelligence
activity purposes relating to offenses or offenders.

The Israel Police may also access personal data transferred from the EU on the basis of the
Wiretapping Law. Wiretapping is defined as listening to a conversation without the consent of
any of the parties, whereas “conversation” is defined to include oral conversations, but also
conversations by means of telecommunication, including (inter alia) between computers 1495.
The Wiretapping Law thus regulates the collection of the content of communications.
Wiretapping is prohibited and subject to imprisonment, except if explicitly authorised by
law 1496. The collection of the content of communications or the use of such information in
violation of the Wiretapping Law is also subject to imprisonment. Communications that are
intercepted in violation of the Wiretapping Law are inadmissible as evidence in judicial
proceedings, except in limited circumstances, e.g., if the proceedings concern a violation of
the Wiretapping Law subject to criminal sanctions 1497.

In the area of criminal law enforcement, the Wiretapping Law allows, in relation to offences
of the felony class (i.e., offenses that are punishable by a prison term of more than three
years), wiretapping for the purposes of detecting, preventing or investigating offences, of
identifying or capturing offenders, and for the investigation of a forfeiture of property related
to an offence 1498. In these cases, wiretapping has to be authorised in an order by the Chief
Justice of a District Court or a Deputy Chief Justice of a District Court authorised by the
Chief Justice for this purpose. The order can be issued only following a request by an
authorised police officer and only if the Judge is convinced, after having considered the extent
of the violation of privacy, that such measure is required to achieve the purposes listed in the
Law 1499.

If known in advance, the order needs to describe the identity of the person for whose
conversation wiretap was approved, or the identity of the line or facility used or intended for
use for reception, transfer or transmission of telecommunications and for which wiretap was
approved, as well as the location or type of conversation. Moreover, the order needs to detail
the manners of wiretapping that are permitted 1500. The validity of the order is limited to three
months, but it may be renewed subject to the same conditions as the initial order 1501.

Exceptionally, the Israeli Police General Commissioner can permit in writing wiretapping for
a maximum period of 48 hours, if he is convinced that for preventing a felony or identifying
its perpetrators there is need for immediate wiretapping and no time to obtain a Court order
through the abovementioned procedure 1502. The Police Commissioner is required to notify


1495
     Article 1 Wiretapping Law.
1496
     Article 2 Wiretapping Law.
1497
     Article 13 Wiretapping Law.
1498
     Article 6 Wiretapping Law.
1499
     Article 6(a) of the Wiretapping Law. The interception of privileged communications (i.e. of an attorney,
physician, psychologist, social worker or clergyman) may only take place upon written request from the Police,
if authorised by a District Court President or Deputy President if the latter is convinced that there are grounds to
suspect that the concerned individual is involved in murder, manslaughter, an offense that poses danger to
national security or a drug transaction offense (Article 9A(a)(2) Wiretapping Law.
1500
     Article 6(d) of the Wiretapping Law.
1501
     Article 6(e) of the Wiretapping Law.
1502
     Article 7 Wiretapping Law.

                                                       201
immediately the Attorney General in writing of such permit, and the Attorney General is
entitled to revoke the permit 1503. The Court may authorise to prolong the wiretapping if the
conditions for wiretapping are fulfilled 1504.

Finally, the Police may, in the performance of its functions, receive information, including
personal data, from other public authorities that can provide such information subject to their
discretion under the PPL where they are not prohibited from doing so by other laws 1505. As a
general requirement, public authorities can share personal data with other authorities (1)
where doing so is within the scope of the mandate or functions of the entity providing the
information and is required for a purpose of implementing a law or for the performance of
tasks by the providing or receiving entity; or (2) where the receiving entity may, by law,
obtain the information in any event from any other source 1506. Any personal data transfer
between public authorities is subject to the constitutional necessity and proportionality
requirements, as described in the AG Opinion 1507.

         2.2.2. Further use of the information collected

The further use of data collected by Israeli criminal law enforcement authorities on one of the
grounds referred to in Section 2.2.1, as well as the sharing of such data with a different
authority for purposes other than the ones for which it was originally collected (so-called
‘onward sharing’), is subject to different safeguards and limitations.

First, the processing of personal data by law enforcement authorities in Israel is governed by
the provisions of the PPL and the Regulations adopted on the basis of the PPL, as described in
section 2.1. The PPL and the relevant Regulations set requirements on lawfulness 1508, purpose
limitation1509, accuracy 1510, transparency 1511, storage limitation 1512 and security1513. In
addition, Chapter D of the PPL provides for specific rules on the sharing of information
between public bodies (as described in the section 2.2.1). When law enforcement authorities
in Israel intend to share personal data with law enforcement authorities of a third country,
specific requirements set out in the Transfer Regulations apply 1514. According to these

1503
     See Article 7(b) of the Wiretapping Law.
1504
     See Article 7(c) of the Wiretapping Law.
1505
     Article 23B(b) PPL.
1506
     Article 23C PPL.
1507
     HCJ 8070/98 ACRI v. Minister of Interior 58(4) PD 842 (2004).
1508
     Chapter A PPL prohibits infringements of privacy without the individual’s consent and thus recognises that
consent can be a legitimate ground for the processing of personal data. It follows from Article 35 PPL and case
law that the collection and processing of personal data can also be based on an authorization by a law. The Israeli
Supreme Court has clarified with respect to public authorities that according to the principle of ‘legality of
authority’ each administrative authority must act solely within the powers vested in it by law. When an
administrative act may lead to an infringement of individual rights, there must be a clear and explicit legal
authority in primary or secondary legislation allowing this act, and the legislative authority must comply with the
Basic law: Human Dignity and Liberty.
1509
     Articles 2(9) and 8(b) PPL.
1510
     Article 14 PPL and Regulation 5 of the Privacy Protection Regulations.
1511
     Article 11 PPL and Regulation 6 of the Privacy Protection Regulations.
1512
     Regulation 4 of the Privacy Protection Regulations and Regulation 2(c) of the Data Security Regulations.
1513
     Articles 16, 17, 17A and 17B PPL and Data Security Regulations.
1514
     In certain limited situations, which concern data generated in Israel or received from law enforcement
authorities abroad and therefore normally do not affect personal data transferred from the EU to Israel on the
basis of the adequacy decision, the conditions for the transfer of personal data abroad are set out in specific
legislation. See e.g., Article 15 Criminal Information and Rehabilitation of Offenders Law, 5779-2019, which

                                                       202
Regulations, the transfer abroad of data from databases in Israel is prohibited, unless the law
of the country to which the data is transferred ensures a level of protection that is not lower
than the level of protection provided for by Israeli law, and provided that certain principles
listed in the Regulations apply 1515. In a limited number of situations listed exhaustively in the
Regulations, data may be transferred abroad even if the law of the country to which the data is
transferred does not ensure an equivalent level of protection. These are either situations in
which the recipient of the data is bound by an agreement with the database owner in Israel to
guarantee the protection of privacy after the transfer in a way that would comply with the
conditions for data processing in Israel, or situations that are similar to the specific situations
in which transfers to third countries are possible in the absence of an adequacy finding or
appropriate safeguards under the GDPR. Transfers may notably take place if the data subject
has consented to the transfer, if the consent of the data subject cannot be obtained and the
transfer is vital to the protection of his health or physical wellbeing, the data was made
available to the public or was opened for public inspection by legal authority, or if the transfer
of data is vital to public safety or security 1516. Finally, in any case of transfer of personal data
abroad, the database controller must ensure that the recipient of the data undertakes in writing
to apply adequate measures in order to protect the privacy of the data subjects and guarantee
that the data shall be transferred to no other person, whether in the recipient’s country or in
another 1517. In any event, as follows in particular from case law, reflected in the AG Opinion,
any processing, including the use, retention or sharing, of personal data by public authorities
has to comply with the principles of lawfulness, necessity and proportionality.

Second, the different laws that allow for data collection by criminal law enforcement
authorities in Israel impose specific limitations and safeguards as to the use and further
dissemination of the information obtained in exercising the powers they grant.

With respect to wiretapping, the Wiretapping Law requires that wiretap material which is not
needed to prevent offences or identify offenders shall be deleted 1518. Moreover, further rules
on the retention and use of wiretap data are contained in the Wiretapping Regulations, 5746-
1986 (Wiretapping Regulations). In terms of retention, the Wiretapping Regulations stipulate
that where an order was received to delete the recording material, every possessor of such

allows the Israel police to transfer information from the criminal registry to a foreign country or to a body
outside of Israel for the purpose of fulfilling its duties, provided that Israel has committed to do so in an
agreement or treaty and subject to certain conditions, notably that the information will only be used for the
purpose of fulfilling the duties of the body receiving the information and only for the purpose of maintaining
public peace and security and the information will not be further shared within the receiving country/receiving
organization or with another country or international organisation. See also Article 214B Tax Authority
Ordinance, which allows tax authorities in Israel to transfer personal information to a tax authority in a foreign
country in accordance with an international agreement, provided that the tax authority was entitled to process
that information, that the third country authority requires the information to enforce its tax laws, that the
international agreement provides for confidentiality and security requirements, and that the information is not
used in the third country for any other purpose than for the enforcement of tax laws and is not further shared
within the country or with other third countries.
1515
     Article 1 Transfer Regulations. The principles are the following: (1) data shall be gathered and processed in a
legal and fair manner; (2) data shall be held, used and delivered only for the purpose for which it was received;
(3) Data gathered shall be accurate and up to date; (4) the right of access and correction is reserved to the data
subject; (5) The obligation to take adequate security measures to protect data in databases is mandatory.
1516
     Article 2 Transfer Regulations.
1517
     Article 3 Transfer Regulations.
1518
     Article 9B (c) Wiretapping Law. In this case, the data must be deleted within 10 days, see Article 7(a) of the
Wiretapping Regulations.

                                                       203
material will delete it within ten days from the order receipt 1519. Moreover, the Wiretapping
Regulations requires that recorded material is kept safe and in a manner that ensures
confidentiality 1520. The Wiretapping Regulations provide that information obtained through
wiretapping or recorded material may be shared with a competent authority 1521 different from
the one that requested the wiretapping or with the Institute for Intelligence and Special
Operations if it may serve for preventing harm to the State security 1522 or serve to prevent
felony class offences or to identify the perpetrators of such offences 1523. Such information
sharing may only take place to the extent it is necessary for the receiving authority to conduct
its functions. The receiving authority has to confirm in writing the receipt of the information
and the extent to which it is necessary to perform its functions 1524.

         2.2.3. Oversight

Different bodies carry out oversight of the activities of criminal law enforcement authorities
in Israel.

Internally, the Data Security Unit within the Israeli police is responsible for supervising the
classification of all data held by the police (including data collected pursuant to the
Communication Data Law or the Wiretapping Law) and its proper use. The Unit can conduct
investigations and inquiries to detect any irregularity, unlawful use of data or use of data
without permission. Irregularities or violations detected by the Data Security Unit are dealt
with through administrative, disciplinary or criminal proceedings.

In terms of independent oversight, the processing of personal data by competent authorities
for criminal law enforcement purposes is first of all subject to the oversight of the PPA, which
is responsible for supervising compliance with the provisions of the PPL and of the
regulations adopted thereunder 1525. In order to carry out its functions, the staff of the PPA can
request relevant information and documents from any person involved, as well as enter,
search and seize any object in any place for which there are reasonable grounds to believe that
a database is operated therein 1526. The PPA can act on the basis of individual complaints or on

1519
     Article 7 Wiretapping Regulations.
1520
     Article 5(a) Wiretapping Law.
1521
     Pursuant to Article 1 of the Wiretapping Regulations, a competent authority is the head of a security agency
or an authorized police officer, as relevant. Article 1 of the Wiretapping Law defines authorized police officer as
police officer with the rank of commander and above authorized by the Police Commissioner.
1522
     The term ‘state security’ has not been interpreted by Israeli courts in the context of the Wiretapping Law or
the Wiretapping Regulations, but in other contexts. For example, the Supreme Court held that the term refers to
“anything relating to the prevention of the risk of enemy invasion from outside the State; thwarting of any
attempt of a violent coup against the existing regime by hostile entities from inside the State; maintaining of
public order and in securing public security”, HCJ 73/53 Kol Haam v. Minister of Interior, G 871 (1953). In
another case, the Supreme Court noted that matters that would be considered as direct threats to state security
include “(1) an attack by a force from outside the state; (2) acts of espionage, sabotage or guerrilla warfare that
might assist an outside enemy in its attempts to undermine the foundations of the regime; (3) direct threats to the
integrity of the state or its institutions by way of sedition, insurgence or terrorism; (4) subversive organisation
whose purpose is to abet, at an opportune time, in the commission of each of the first three acts.” HCJ 4374/15
The Movement for Quality Government in Israel v. Prime Minister of Israel (published in Nevo, 27.03.2016).
1523
     Article 9 Wiretapping Law.
1524
     See Article 9(a) and (b) of the Wiretapping Regulations.
1525
     Articles 10(a) and (c) PPL.
1526
     Article 10(e1) PPL. Pursuant to Article 10(e1)(2) PPL the procedures for entering a military facility or a
facility of a security agency are prescribed by the Minister of Justice upon consultation with the Minister in
charge of the security agency. Such regulations have not yet been enacted and therefore physical access by the

                                                       204
its own initiative. If a possessor or owner of a database has infringed any provision of the PPL
or fails to comply with a demand from the PPA, the PPA may suspend or cancel the
registration of a database, the result of which is that the database owner is not allowed to
process data in this database 1527.

The PPA conducts oversight actions that concern the processing activities carried out by law
enforcement authorities. For example, in January 2023, the PPA imposed a fine on an
employee of the Israeli Tax Authority for unauthorised use and disclosure of personal data
from the Authority’s database 1528. The annual reports of the PPA also show that it regularly
engages with law enforcement authorities, including at an early stage when new technologies
are being tested or rolled out 1529.

Second, independent oversight of the Police is carried out by the State Comptroller ( 1530, who,
as part of his auditing mandate, may examine the lawfulness of acts carried out by public
authorities and any other matter he deems necessary in regard to such acts 1531. In his/her audit
reports, the State Comptroller details any infringements of any law, of the principles of
economy and efficiency or of moral integrity, and matters that demand for rectification 1532.
The head of the audited authority is required to report to the Comptroller on the envisaged
actions to rectify identified deficiencies and the timing for implementing them 1533. The
findings of the State Comptroller are also brought to the knowledge of the Minister
concerned, the Prime Minister, the Israeli Parliament (Knesset), as well as, in the case of a
suspicion of a criminal act, the Attorney General 1534. The Prime Minister must submit to the
State Comptroller a detailed response to each report within eight months, including on the
steps taken to rectify any deficiencies 1535. While reports of the State Comptroller are in
general made public, they may be redacted or withheld where necessary for the protection of
national security or to avoid damage to Israel’s foreign relations or international trade
relations 1536.

Finally, oversight over the activities of law enforcement authorities in Israel is carried out by
the Attorney General and the Knesset.


PPA to facilities of security agencies or military for the purpose of an inspection or to carry out an investigation
has to be arranged on an ad hoc basis.
1527
     Article 10(b2) and (f) PPL. According to Article 31A(a)(1), managing or processing data in a non-registered
database is a criminal offense.
1528
     https://www.gov.il/he/departments/news/fine95k.
1529
                                                         See                                                    e.g.,
https://moj.my.salesforce.com/sfc/dist/version/download/?oid=00D1t000000uX5h&ids=0683Y00000GxYkf&d=
%2Fa%2F3Y000001VFUu%2FLSL4C3hfDNacZjKXm65jnxMBYJxrjTOjqGw_YgHg.4s&asPdf=false.
1530
     The State Comptroller is elected by the Knesset, upon nomination by Knesset members (Article 1(a) and 3
State Comptroller Law, 5718-1958). During his/her term of office, the State Comptroller may inter alia not be a
member of the Knesset, the council of a local authority or an entity carrying business for profit, or hold any other
office or engage, directly or indirectly in any business, trade ore profession (Article 7(a) State Comptroller Law).
The State Comptroller may only be removed by the Knesset on grounds of behaviour unfitting his/her position
on demand of at least twenty Knesset members and upon a proposal of the House Committee of the Knesset
(Article 8A State Comptroller Law).
1531
     Article 2(b) Basic Law: State Comptroller and Article 10(a)(d) State Comptroller Law.
1532
     Article 14(a) State Comptroller Law.
1533
     Articles 21A-21B State Comptroller Law.
1534
     Article 14(a)-(c) State Comptroller Law.
1535
     Articles 16 and 21B(b) State Comptroller Law.
1536
     Article 17 State Comptroller Law.

                                                        205
Under the Communication Data Law, the Head of Investigation and Intelligence Department
is required to submit a report to the Attorney General once every three months concerning
permits issued 1537. Under the Wiretapping Law, the Police Commissioner is similarly required
to submit monthly reports to the Attorney General on wiretapping permits issued to prevent
offenses and identify offenders, and the Minister of Police reports annually to the Joint
Committee for the Constitution, Law and Justice and the National Security Committee of the
Knesset, including on the number of applications filed and the number of permits issued, as
well as on the number of persons, telecommunication lines and facilities for which wiretap
was permitted 1538. Both the Attorney General and the Knesset may ask for any further
information they consider necessary for the performance of their oversight role 1539. The
Attorney General may determine that a particular activity was unlawful and should be
terminated or require to review and/or change unlawful police procedures. The Knesset’s
Committees may organise debates, summon public officials and civil servants to provide
information at their disposal on the activities of the body in which they serve, and issue
recommendations.

In addition to its review of the abovementioned periodic reports, the Knesset is also
authorised, as part of its constitutional role, to require from any governmental authority,
including from security authorities, any information regarding their activities.

         2.2.4. Redress

The Israeli system offers different avenues to obtain redress, including the possibility to
obtain compensation for damages.

First, pursuant to the PPL and the Privacy Protection Regulations, individuals have the rights
of access to 1540 and correction 1541 and deletion 1542 of their personal data held by public
authorities, including public authorities in the areas of criminal law enforcement and national
security. While the exercise of the right of access to personal data granted by the PPL may be
restricted with respect to certain data 1543, the case law of Israeli courts on the right of access,

1537
     Article 4(e) Communication Data Law.
1538
     Article 6(f) and (g) Wiretapping Law.
1539
     Regarding the role and powers of the Knesset, see Article 42 Basic Law: The Government and Articles 123-
127 of the Knesset’s rules of procedure.
1540
     Article 13(a) PPL. While the exercise of the right of access to personal data granted by Articles 13 and 13A
PPL may be restricted with respect to, among others, data held in databases of security agencies or in databases
regarding investigation and law enforcement, the case law of Israeli courts, as confirmed by the PPA, has
clarified that the relevant entities are required to examine on a case-by-case basis whether to apply the
exemption, and to apply the exemption only to the extent necessary and proportionate, see above section 2.1.
1541
     Article 14 PPL and Regulation 6 of the Privacy Protection Regulations. The application of the Privacy
Protection Regulations to the use of data for the protection of national security or criminal law enforcement may
be restricted, but only to the extent necessary and proportionate for these purposes, see Regulation 2(b)(2) of the
Privacy Protection Regulations.
1542
     Regulation 3 of the Privacy Protection Regulations. In addition, their application to the use of data for the
protection of national security or criminal law enforcement may be restricted, but only to the extent necessary
and proportionate for these purposes, see Regulation 2(b)(2) of the Privacy Protection Regulations.
1543
     The right of access may be restricted in particular with respect to data contained in a database of a security
agency, Article 13(e)(1) PPL, with respect to databases regarding investigation and law enforcement, Article
13(e)(5) PPL, and where the State security, its foreign relations or the provisions of any law require that data of a
person is not disclosed to him, Article 13(e)(3) PPL. ‘Security agency’ is defined in Article 19(c) PPL as the
Israel Police, the Directorate of Military Intelligence and the Military Police, the Israel Security Agency, the
Institute for Intelligence and Special Operations, and the Witness Protection Authority.

                                                        206
as confirmed by the PPA in an opinion on the individual right of access pursuant to the
PPL 1544, has clarified that this restriction does not exempt the relevant entities “from
examining, on a case-by-case basis, the justification for applying the exemption, with regard
to the individual's access to data about him in databases of these entities” and that “[…] the
exemption is to be applied only to the extent necessary and proportionate”. More specifically,
the Israeli Supreme Court has held that any limitation to the individual right of access should
be done while striking a balance with the interests standing against it, in each and every case.
The striking of such balance should be made while taking into consideration the nature of the
case, its circumstances, the essence of the harm that the authority's decision will cause for the
individual, and the question of the finality of the decision for which access is requested 1545. If
a request for the exercise of rights is refused, individuals have the possibility to file a
complaint with the PPA or, if a request for access or rectification is refused, may apply
directly to court 1546.

Second, any individual may lodge a complaint concerning the processing of personal data by
an Israeli law enforcement authority with the PPA, who can make use of all of its
investigative and enforcement powers described in section 1.2.

Third, any individual may file a complaint with the Ombudsman 1547 against an act or
omission of a public authority, including any unlawful processing of personal data by the
Police 1548. In investigating a complaint, the Ombudsman has access to any relevant
information and may hear the complainant, the entity against which the complaint is directed,
as well as any other person 1549. Where the Ombudsman finds that the complaint is justified,
the complainant will be notified thereof, together with the reasons 1550. The Ombudsman may
indicate to the relevant public authority the need to rectify an issue revealed by the
investigation (including for instance by paying a monetary compensation), as well as how and
within what time period such rectification should be carried out 1551. The concerned authority
must inform, within the time frame set by the Ombudsman, of the steps that have been taken
in response to the Ombudsman’s decision regarding the complaint 1552. If the Ombudsman is
not satisfied with the information provided, (s)he may bring the matter to the knowledge of
the concerned Minister or the relevant Knesset Committee. Any complaint which raises the



1544
     PPA Opinion on Article 13 of the Privacy Protection Law: The Individual Right of Access, published on 6
August 2023, available at: https://www.gov.il/he/departments/publications/reports/right_to_access2023.
1545
     Israeli Supreme Court, HCJ 93/06 Kol Gader v. The Minister of Industry, Trade and Labor (published in
Nevo 2 August 2011). This approach was also confirmed with regard to access to criminal investigation files,
both by the data subject itself and by third parties, in State Attorney Guideline No. 14.8 “Request from different
entities to access data from investigation files” (last updated on 7 April 2021), available at:
https://www.gov.il/BlobFolder/dynamiccollectorresultitem/14-008-00/he/s-a-guidelines_014.8.pdf.
1546
     Article 15 PPL.
1547
     In accordance with Article 4 Basic Law: State Comptroller and chapter 7 of State Comptroller Law, the State
Comptroller of Israel also functions as the Israeli Ombudsman.
1548
     Articles 33, 36 and 37 State Comptroller Law. The Ombudsman does not investigate complaints that can be
resolved through other avenues or that are submitted more than one year later than the date of the act to which
they relate or the data on which the act became known to the complainant (whichever is later). See Article 39
State Comptroller Law.
1549
     Article 41(c)-(d) State Comptroller Law.
1550
     Article 43(a) State Comptroller Law.
1551
     Article 43(a) State Comptroller Law.
1552
     Article 43(b) State Comptroller Law.

                                                      207
suspicion of a criminal act having occurred is forwarded to the Attorney General by the
Ombudsman 1553.

Fourth, individuals can make use of the different judicial avenues described in section 1.2,
including to obtain compensation for damages for violations of the PPL, submit a criminal
complaint pursuant to Article 68 of the Israeli Criminal Procedure Law where unlawful
processing of personal data constitutes a criminal offence (e.g., under the PPL).

Importantly, an individual seeking to challenge the collection of his or her personal data for
the purposes of criminal law enforcement has the possibility to file a petition for judicial
review to the Israeli Supreme Court 1554. In accordance with Article 15(d) of the Basic Law:
The Judiciary, the Supreme Court, sitting as High Court of Justice is empowered to hear and
adjudicate petitions against state authorities or other bodies fulfilling by law public functions
in the state, and thus exercises judicial review of the activities of government authorities.
More specifically, a petition may be filed by an individual, including a non-Israeli national or
resident, against any act or omission of any of the state authorities, including the Israel Police,
which in the opinion of the petitioner violate the laws. The Supreme Court has a wide
discretion in deciding whether to hear petition brought before them, so that even citizens and
bodies not directly affected by the actions of the state can petition against it 1555.

The Supreme Court, sitting as High Court of Justice, is empowered to grant equitable relief, to
order State and local authorities and the officials and bodies thereof, and other persons
carrying out public functions under the law, to do or refrain from doing any act in the lawful
exercise of their functions; to order courts, tribunals and bodies and persons having judicial or
quasi-judicial powers under law, to hear, refrain from hearing, or continue hearing a particular
matter or to void a proceeding improperly taken or a decision improperly given. It is also
empowered to issue any order it sees fit towards any public body or any body exercising
public authority. In case of a violation of privacy or data protection, this includes the power to
order the deletion of personal data held by the relevant authority. Furthermore, the Supreme
Court, sitting as a court of appeal, is empowered to order remedies in accordance with other
laws, such as the PPL, including by ordering alternative relief (whereby the petitioner may for
instance turn to a civil court to demand compensation) 1556.

       2.3. Access and use by Israeli public authorities for national security purposes




1553
     Article 43(d) State Comptroller Law.
1554
     The Supreme Court is the highest court of judicial review for public matters, including administrative
matters which relate to disputes between a citizen and an authority exercising governmental powers. As such, it
is authorized to hear any matter in which it deems necessary to provide relief for the sake of justice (notably
cases that are particularly sensitive, have wide implications or raise fundamental issues) or which is not within
the jurisdiction of another court or tribunal, see Article 15(c) Basic Law: The Judiciary. The Supreme Court can
also elect at its own discretion to hear a particular matter itself, even if it is under the jurisdiction of another
court, for instance if that matter raises fundamental questions and/or has particularly wide or sensitive
implications.
1555
     This was for example the case in the Association or Civil Rights in Israel case, in which the Supreme Court
set important standards concerning data collection under the Telecommunication Data Law.
1556
     Article 15 of the Basic Law: The Judiciary.

                                                       208
In Israel, the main authority competent to collect personal data for national security purposes
is the Israel Security Agency (ISA) 1557, whose powers are mainly governed by the Israel
Security Agency Law, the Wiretapping Law and the PPL. Israeli law imposes a number of
safeguards and limitations on how the ISA has access to and uses personal data for national
security purposes and provides oversight and redress mechanisms in this area. The conditions
under which access to personal data can take place and the safeguards applicable to the use of
these powers are assessed in the following sections.

        2.3.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

The ISA’s functions and mandate are defined in the ISA Law, which provides that it is in
charge of the “protection of State security and the order and institutions of the democratic
regime against threats of terrorism, sabotage, subversion, espionage, and disclosure of State
secrets, and to safeguard and promote other State interests vital for national State
security” 1558. The ISA may exercise different functions and powers, including protecting
individuals, information and places determined by the Government; conducting intelligence
research, as well as collecting and receiving information to safeguard and promote the
abovementioned interests 1559. In doing so, the ISA may access personal data transferred from
the EU to Israel (including while in transit), subject to specific limitations and safeguards.

The ISA may intercept the content of communications on the basis of the Wiretapping Law,
may collect communications data (i.e., metadata, excluding the content of communications)
on the basis of the ISA Law and may, on the basis of the PPL, receive personal data from
other Israeli public authorities. In addition to the limitations and safeguards that follow from
these laws (as described below), the Attorney General has issued a binding legal opinion
further clarifying the application of the constitutional principles of lawfulness, necessity and
proportionality to the activities of public bodies in Israel and the ISA in particular.

As any other public authority, the ISA may only take a measure that interferes with the right
to data protection of individuals if such measure is provided for or authorised by law, pursues
an appropriate purpose, is suitable to achieve that purpose, constitutes the least intrusive
measure (compared to other available measures) and is proportionate (which requires
balancing the benefits that would be achieved by the measure against the harm that would be
caused to the individual) 1560.

Accordingly, and as further specified in the legal opinion issued by the Attorney General, the
ISA may only process personal data on the basis of the ISA Law and the Wiretapping Law,
and in accordance with the PPL if the following conditions are met 1561. First, there must be a
legitimate purpose for the processing 1562. The specific purposes for which the ISA may collect

1557
     On the basis of the Wiretapping Law, the Intelligence Branch of the Israel Defence Forces may also collect
information for national security purposes, subject to the same conditions and legal requirements described for
the ISA below. See Article 1 of the Wiretapping Law, where it defines ‘security authority’.
1558
     Article 7(a) ISA Law.
1559
     Article 7(b) ISA Law. See also Articles 8-10 ISA Law.
1560
     Article 8 of the Basic Law, as well as case law, see e.g., CA 6821/93 Bank Mizrachi Meuchad v. Migdal
Cooperative Village 49(4) PD 221 (1995); HCJ 2605-05 The Human Rights Division, Academic Center of Law
and Business v. Minister of Finance 63(2) PD 545 (2009).
1561
     P. 4 of the AG Opinion.
1562
     Population Registry HCJ, sections 1 and 6 in the judgment of Justice (ret.) Dorner.

                                                     209
and process data follow from specific legislation (e.g., the ISA Law) 1563, as described below.
Second, the processing must be necessary to attain the legitimate purpose. In this respect, the
ISA must examine whether there are less intrusive means to achieve the same purpose and
ensure that only the minimum data required for the legitimate purpose is processed 1564.
Finally, in assessing the proportionality of a surveillance measure, the ISA must take several
factors into account, such as the nature and sensitivity of the data processed, the amount/scope
of data processed, the duration of the processing (including how long it would be stored), the
transparency of the processing towards concerned individuals, the number of employees that
will have access to the data and the severity of the threat to national security 1565. These
requirements, which follow from the Basic Law and case law and are confirmed in the
binding legal opinion of the Attorney General, apply to any processing of personal data by the
ISA (e.g., to the collection, use, storage and sharing of personal data) 1566. They constitute the
standard against which bodies that authorise surveillance measures (see below), as well as
oversight bodies and courts, have to assess the lawfulness of the collection and further
processing of personal data for national security purposes 1567.

In terms of specific powers that have to be exercised in compliance with above legal
requirements, the ISA may, on the basis of the Wiretapping Law, collect the content of
communications. Procedurally, such collection must, upon request from the ISA, be
authorised in writing by the Prime Minister 1568, if (s)he is satisfied that the collection is
necessary (as interpreted in line with the principles set out above) for the protection of
national security, after considering the level of interference with the rights of individuals (i.e.,
if the abovementioned requirement of proportionality is met) 1569. The authorisation issued by
the Prime Minister must, if known in advance, indicate the identity of the concerned
individual or of the line or facility used, as well as the location and duration of the wiretap and
manner in which it will be carried out 1570. A wiretap authorisation is valid for a maximum
period of three months, renewable under the same conditions 1571. The Prime Minister must

1563
     P. 2 of the AG Opinion.
1564
     Nachmias, section 13 in the judgment of Justice Bach; Population Registry HCJ, sections 6-7 in the
judgment of Justice (ret.) Dorner.]
1565
     Urich, sections 73 and 75 in the judgment of President Chayut; Nachmias, sections 10, 13 in the judgment of
Justice Bach; Telecommunication Data Law HCJ, sections 16 and 26 of President (ret.) Beinisch; First ISA
Authorization HCJ, sections 38-39, 43-45 in the judgment of President Chayut; Population Registry HCJ, section
7 in the judgment of Justice (ret.) Dorner; Second ISA Authorization HCJ, section 7 in the judgment of Justice
Hendel, section 18 in the judgment of President Chayut.
1566
      See e.g., HCJ 3809/08 Association for Civil Rights in Israel v. Israel Police (May 28, 2012),
(Telecommunications Data Law HCJ), sections 5-7 in the judgment of President (ret.) Beinisch; Nachmias,
section 10 in the judgment of Justice Bach; First ISA Authorization HCJ, sections 18 and 38 in the judgment of
President Chayut; Second ISA Authorization HCJ, section seven in the judgment of Justice Hendel, section 12 in
the judgment of Justice Barak-Erez; HCJ 8070/98 Association for Civil Rights in Israel v. Ministry of Interior
58(4) PD 842 (2004) (Population Registry HCJ), section 7 in the judgment of Justice (ret.) Dorner. See also p. 13
of the AG letter.
1567
     P. 4-5 and 9-10 of the AG Opinion.
1568
     Or the Minister of Defence, as regards the Israel Defence Forces.
1569
     Article 4(a) Wiretapping Law. See also p. 5 of the AG Opinion. A specific procedure applies to the
interception of communications of privileged communications. Such a wiretap may be requested by the ISA in
writing with respect to an offense that endangers national security, where required for the protection of national
security. The interception may be authorised by a District Court President or Deputy President if there are
grounds to suspect that an attorney, physician, psychologist, social worker or clergyman is involved in the
offence (Article 9A(a)(1) Wiretapping Law).
1570
     Article 4(b) Wiretapping Law.
1571
     Article 4(c) Wiretapping Law.

                                                      210
notify the Attorney General every three months about authorisations issued 1572. In urgent
cases, i.e., if the head of the ISA concludes that the protection of national security requires an
immediate wiretap and there is no time to obtain authorisation, the head of the ISA may issue
a written authorisation containing the same elements as described above 1573. Such an
authorisation is only valid for 48 hours and must be reported immediately to the Prime
Minister, who may revoke it 1574.

Pursuant to the ISA Law, the ISA may also collect communications data (i.e., metadata,
excluding the content of a conversation, which can only be intercepted on the basis of the
Wiretapping Law) from telecommunication operators (i.e., companies licensed in Israel to
offer communication services) 1575. In particular, the ISA may request metadata where
necessary for the performance of its duties, i.e., for the protection of national security and the
order and institutions of the democratic regime against threats of terrorism, sabotage,
subversion, espionage and disclosure of State secrets, as well as for safeguarding and
promoting other State interests vital for national security 1576. Any such request may only be
issued by the ISA if it complies with the requirements of necessity and proportionality, as
confirmed by the binding legal opinion of the Attorney General. With respect to the
possibility to access data obtained in response to a request of the ISA, the ISA Law imposes
additional safeguards. In particular, any employee of the ISA may only access such data for
the performance of his/her official duties if specifically authorised to do so by the head of the
ISA 1577.

Finally, the ISA may, under the same conditions as described in section 2.2.2 with respect to
the Police, receive information, including personal data, from other public authorities
providing such information on a voluntary basis 1578.

        2.3.2. Further use of the information collected

The processing of personal data obtained by the ISA for national security purposes is
governed by the provisions of the PPL and of the Regulations adopted on its basis, as
described in section 2.1 1579. As regards the sharing of information obtained through
wiretapping with other Israeli authorities, the same requirements of the Wiretapping
Regulations as the ones described in section 2.2.2 apply.

Additional requirements for the retention, deletion and further sharing of the content of
communications and communications data follow from specific classified rules issued by the



1572
     Article 4(d) Wiretapping Law.
1573
     Article 5(a) Wiretapping Law.
1574
     Article 5(a)-(b) Wiretapping Law. In case of a wiretap of a privileged conversation (of an attorney,
physician, psychologist, social worker or clergyman), the ISA must notify the Attorney General, who in turn
may revoke the authorisation (Article 5(c) Wiretapping Law).
1575
     See Article 11(a) ISA Law. The ISA Law does not provide the ISA with a legal basis to demand information
from other types of companies, such as internet and technology companies, or cloud service providers.
1576
     See the ISA’s tasks described in Article 7(a) ISA Law.
1577
     Article 11(c) ISA Law.
1578
     Article 23B(b) PPL.
1579
     The PPL applies to the processing of personal data by a competent authority, including for the purpose of
safeguarding against or preventing threats to national security.

                                                    211
Prime Minister under the Wiretapping Law and ISA Law 1580. At the same time, as indicated
in section 2.3.1 and as follows in particular from case law, reflected in the binding legal
opinion of the Attorney General, any such processing, including the use, retention or sharing,
of personal data by the ISA has to comply with the principles of lawfulness, necessity and
proportionality.

         2.3.3. Oversight

The access of personal data by Israeli security agencies for purposes of national security is
subject to similar oversight mechanisms as already outlined with respect to criminal law
enforcement.

Internally, the ISA Comptroller is responsible for internal audits, including with respect to the
ISA’s processing of personal data for national security purposes 1581. The Comptroller has
access to all relevant information and reports annually to the Head of the ISA, the Ministerial
Committee on ISA Affairs and the Knesset Committee on ISA Affairs 1582. If the comptroller
finds a violation of the law, such findings must be included in the periodic reports 1583.

In terms of independent oversight, the PPA oversees the processing of personal data by
national security authorities in light of the PPL and the relevant Regulations. The PPA can
request relevant information and documents from any person involved in the processing of
personal data for national security purposes. If a possessor or owner of a database has
infringed any provision of the PPL, the PPA has the power to suspend or cancel the
registration of a database, and thus suspend or prohibit the database owner from processing or
managing this database.

In addition, the State Comptroller is competent to oversee the activities of the ISA, in the
same way as described in section 2.2.3.

In terms of governmental and parliamentary oversight, Article 11(d) of the ISA Law requires
the Head of the ISA to report every three months to the Prime Minister and to the Attorney
general on the permits issued to use communication data that has been transmitted to the ISA
pursuant to Article 11(b) of the ISA Law, and on the mode of use of such data under Article
11(c) of the Law. The reports include information on the number of permits issued by virtue
of Article 11, the ways in which the information was used. The same type of report is
submitted to the Knesset Service Affairs Committee, i.e., the Sub-Committee for Intelligence
and Secret Services of the Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee of the Knesset, on an
annual basis. Moreover, the Head of the ISA reports every three months to the Ministerial

1580
     Rules promulgated under the ISA Law are subject to approval by the Ministerial Committee on ISA affairs
and the Knesset Committee on ISA affairs. Rules on retention and deletion of information collected under
Article 11, require in addition the consent of the Minister of Justice (See Article 11(e) and Article 21(a) ISA
Law). Rules promulgated under the Wiretapping Law on deletion of wiretap material and the retention of
material for security purposes require the consent of the Minister of Justice and the approval of a joint committee
of the Constitution Justice and Law Committee and Foreign Affairs and Security Committee of the Knesset (see
Article 9B Wiretapping Law).
1581
     See Article 13(c) ISA Law. The Comptroller is appointed by the Prime Minister, in consultation with the
head of the ISA, for one term of five years. Upon expiration of this term, the Comptroller cannot serve in any
other position in the ISA. See Article 13(a)-(b) ISA Law.
1582
     Article 13(e)(2) and (5) ISA Law.
1583
     Article 13(e)(5) ISA Law.

                                                       212
Committee (i.e., a committee appointed by the Israeli government for Security Agency affairs,
which for these matters operates in the name of the government) and the Knesset Service
Affairs Committee on the general activities of the agency. Both the Ministerial Committee
and the Knesset Service Affairs Committee may also request special reports from the Head of
the ISA 1584. Both the Attorney General and the Knesset may ask for any further information
they consider necessary for the performance of their oversight role. The Attorney General
may determine that a particular activity was unlawful and should be terminated or require to
review and/or change unlawful procedures. The Knesset’s Committees may organise debates,
summon public officials and civil servants to provide information and issue
recommendations.

As regards the Wiretapping Law, under Article 4(d) any issuing or renewal of a wiretap
permit for the purposes of State Security has to be immediately notified to the Prime Minister,
if the Minister of Defence issued it. Moreover, the Minister of Defence notifies the Attorney
General once every three months of wiretap permits issued for the purposes of State
Security 1585. The Attorney General, together with the ISA, examines specific issues in order
to ensure that data is used in a limited and proportionate manner, and solely for the purposes
of state security set out in the Law. The issues discussed during these examinations may
concern specific cases or broader trends and can lead to changes of internal procedures.

Finally, the Minister also reports on an annual basis the number of permits issued in this area
to a joint committee of the Knesset Constitution, Law and Justice Committee and the Foreign
Affairs and Security Committee 1586.

         2.3.4. Redress

The Israeli system offers different avenues to obtain redress, including compensation for
damages.

First, individuals can exercise their rights of access, correction and deletion with respect to
data held by the ISA under the PPL, under the same conditions as described in section
2.2.4 1587. If a request is refused, any individual has the possibility to lodge a complaint with
the PPA, that can make use of all of its investigative and enforcement powers.

Second, any individual, can file complaints with the PPA about the processing of their
personal data by the ISA. The PPA is bound to review every complaint it receives and to
notify the applicant of its decision in that regard 1588.

Third, any individual can lodge a complaint before the Ombudsman concerning the handling
of their data by the ISA, in the same way as described in section 2.2.4.



1584
     See Article 12(a) and (b) of the ISA Law.
1585
     Article 4(d) of the Wiretapping Law
1586
     See Article 4(e) of the Wiretapping Law.
1587
     See for example the Supreme Court ruling in HCJ 3098/20 Vinter v. Israel Police (17 November 2020), in
which the Court, sitting as High Court of Justice, ruled on a request for access to investigative material,
including personal data, held, among other, by the ISA and the Israel Police.
1588
     In addition, the PPA is required to handle public inquiries where there are grounds for harming data subjects
under the PPL, see Article 2(D) of Government Resolution No. 1890.

                                                      213
Finally, the same judicial avenues as the ones described in section 2.2.4 (e.g., to obtain
compensation for damages for violations of the PPL, to submit a criminal complaint, or to file
a petition to the Israeli Supreme Court) are also available against the ISA.




                                             214
                                                VIII. JERSEY

1. RULES APPLYING TO THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA

       1.1. Relevant developments in the data protection framework of Jersey

On 8 May 2008 the European Commission adopted a decision in which Jersey was considered
as providing an adequate level of protection for personal data 1589. The Article 29 Working
Party had adopted a positive opinion on the level of protection of personal data in Jersey on 9
October 2007 1590. At the time, data protection in Jersey was governed by the Data Protection
(Jersey) Law 2005 (Data Protection Law 2005). The Data Protection Law 2005 was
substantially identical to the UK’s Data Protection Act 1998, which implemented Directive
95/46/EC (Data Protection Directive) 1591. It also established the independent office of the
Information Commissioner, which regulated compliance with the law.

Since the adoption of the Commission’s adequacy decision, Jersey has significantly
modernised its data protection framework, in particular by adopting the Data Protection
(Jersey) Law 2018 (Data Protection Law), which repeals the previous 2005 Law. Along with
the Data Protection Authority (Jersey) Law 2018 (Data Protection Authority Law), it was
drafted to ensure a level of protection in line with Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR) 1592. It
entered into force in May 2018.

With the adoption and full entry into force of the Data Protection Law, the Jersey data
protection regime has been significantly strengthened. As set out in more detail below, the
Data Protection Law mirrors the provisions of the GPDR with respect to all of its key aspects.
In particular, in areas where the GDPR has enhanced the protection of personal data when
compared to the protection offered by its predecessor, the Data Protection Directive, the Data
Protection Law of Jersey has been strengthened as well.

Like the Data Protection Law 2005, the new Data Protection Law has a broad scope of
application, applying to both private operators and public authorities 1593. While the definitions
of ‘personal data’ 1594, ‘controller’ 1595, ‘processor’ 1596, ‘data subject’ 1597 and ‘processing’1598


1589
     Commission Decision 2008/393/EC of 8 May 2008 on the adequate protection of personal data in Jersey, OJ
L 128, 28.5.2008, p. 21-23.
1590
      Opinion 8/2007 on the level of protection of personal data in Jersey (WP141), available at:
https://ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2007/wp141_en.pdf.
1591
     Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data.
1592
     Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).
1593
     The Jersey data protection regime applies to the processing of personal data in the context of a controller or
processor established in Jersey, see Article 4(2)(a) Data Protection Law. The Law does not apply to the
processing of personal data by natural persons in the course of a purely personal or household activity, see
Article 4(1) Data Protection Law.
1594
     ‘Personal data’ is defined in Article 2(1) Data Protection Law as “any data relating to a data subject”, while
‘data subject’ is defined in Article 2(2) of the Data Protection Law as “an identified or identifiable, natural,
living person who can be identified, directly or indirectly, by reference to (but not limited to) an identifier such
as (1) a name, an identification number or location data; (2) an online identifier; or (3) one or more factors
specific to the physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic, cultural or social identity of the person.”
1595
      Pursuant to Article 1(1) Data Protection Law, ‘controller’ means “the natural or legal person, public
authority, agency or other body that, whether alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of

                                                       215
(which are identical to those used in the GDPR) have not changed, the Data Protection Law
has brought even more convergence with the GDPR, e.g., by introducing a definition of
‘pseudonymisation’ 1599. Moreover, the recent reform further aligned the notion of personal
data with the GDPR by clarifying when a person is “identifiable” 1600. Also the territorial
scope of the Law has been extended to cover the processing of personal data by controllers or
processors not established in Jersey, subject to the same conditions that are set out in Article 3
of the GDPR 1601. This confirms the intention of the Jersey legislator to strengthen the
effectiveness of Jersey’s data protection regime.

The main data protection principles (i.e., the principles of lawfulness, fairness, transparency,
purpose limitation, data minimisation, accuracy, storage limitation, integrity and
confidentiality) were already present in the Data Protection Law 2005 and are present also in
the modernised Law 1602. Some of them have been further strengthened, e.g., the principle of
lawfulness of processing, the transparency obligations, the security principle and the principle
of accountability.

In particular, as regards the principle of lawfulness, the requirements for valid consent have
been reinforced, by making clear that, in addition to being freely given, specific and informed,
consent must be unambiguous and expressed by a clear affirmative action 1603. Similarly, the
Data Protection Law has strengthened the existing transparency obligations by requiring that
additional information is provided to the individual (e.g., the contact details of the data
protection officer, the fact that the controller intends to transfer the data to a third country, the
retention period, the right to withdraw consent, the existence of automated decision-making,
etc.) when data is collected directly from the individual or from third parties 1604 and when it is
further processed 1605.



the processing of personal data, and where those purposes and means are determined by the relevant law, the
controller or the specific criteria for its nomination may be provided for by such law.”
1596
     Pursuant to Article 1(1) Data Protection Law, ‘processor’ means “a natural or legal person, public authority,
agency or other body that processes personal data on behalf of the controller but does not include an employee of
the controller.”
1597
     See footnote 4.
1598
     ‘Processing’ is defined in Article 1(1) Data Protection Law as “any operation or set of operations that is
performed on personal data or on sets of personal data, whether or not by automated means, such as collection,
recording, organisation, structuring, storage, adaptation or alteration, retrieval, consultation, use, disclosure by
transmission, dissemination or otherwise making available, alignment or combination, restriction, erasure or
destruction.”.
1599
     Article 3 Data Protection Law.
1600
     Pursuant to Article 2(3) Data Protection Law, in deciding whether the person is identified or identifiable, one
must take into account the means reasonably likely to be used by the controller or another person to identify the
person, taking into account factors such as the cost and amount of time required for identification in the light of
the available technology at the time of processing and technological factors; and whether the personal data,
despite pseudonymization, is capable of being attributed to that person by the use of information other than that
kept separately for the purposes of pseudonymisation.
1601
     Article 4(2)(b) and (c) Data Protection Law.
1602
     Article 8 Data Protection Law.
1603
     Article 11 Data Protection Law.
1604
     Article 12 Data Protection Law. This obligation is subject to several exceptions, which are similar to the
exceptions listed in Article 14(5) GDPR. Where an exception applies, the controller must take appropriate
measures to protect individual rights, including by making the information publicly available (see Article 13(6)
and (7) Data Protection Law).
1605
     Article 13(3) Data Protection Law.

                                                       216
With respect to the principle of data security, the Data Protection Law has introduced the
obligation to notify data breaches 1606, which was previously not present in the Jersey regime.
As also required by the GDPR, in case of a personal data breach, the controller must, as soon
as practicable, and in any event, within 72 hours after becoming aware of the breach (unless
the latter is not practicable), notify the personal data breach in writing to the Authority. If a
personal data breach is likely to pose a high risk to the significant interests of a data subject,
written notice must be provided also to the data subject.

In terms of accountability, the obligations have been fully aligned with the GDPR and
requirements that were previously not present in the Jersey law have been introduced: The
Data Protection Law contains the obligations to implement principles of data protection by
design and by default 1607, to keep records of processing 1608, to designate a data protection
officer 1609, and to conduct impact assessments 1610. Like the GDPR, the Data Protection Law
follows a risk-based approach, and the scope of the obligations is tailored to the risks for the
rights and freedoms of natural persons.

In addition to the strengthening of data protection principles and obligations, the protections
for special categories of personal data have been reinforced since the adoption of the
adequacy decision. The Data Protection Law 2005 already offered additional protection for
information about the racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious beliefs or other
beliefs of a similar nature, about membership in a trade union or other labour organisation,
about physical or mental health and the commission or alleged commission of an offence1611.
The Data Protection Law extends this protection to biometric and genetic data, as well as to
data concerning a natural person’s sexual orientation 1612. As regards the safeguards that apply
to the processing of special categories of data, the Data Protection Law allows the processing
of special categories of data only in specific circumstances 1613, as was already the case under
the Data Protection Law 2005 1614. Moreover, controllers and processors that process special
categories of data may be subject to specific accountability requirements, such as the keeping
of records 1615, the appointment of a data protection officer 1616, and the carrying out of impact
assessments 1617.



1606
     Articles 6(1)(g) and 20 Data Protection Law.
1607
     Articles 6(1)(d) and 15 Data Protection Law.
1608
     Articles 6(1)I and 14 Data Protection Law.
1609
     Articles 6(1)(h) and 24 Data Protection Law.
1610
     Article 16 Data Protection Law.
1611
     Article 2 Data Protection Law 2005.
1612
     Article 1(1) Data Protection Law.
1613
     Part 2 of Schedule 2 to the Data Protection Law. For example, similarly to the GDPR, the Data Protection
Law allows the processing of special categories of data where the data subject has given explicit consent, where
processing is necessary for compliance with a legal obligation or where processing is necessary to protect the
vital interest of the data subject. Article 26 of Schedule 2 provides that other regulations may set further
requirements for the processing of special category data, including by excluding the application of Schedule 2 or
modifying its application. To date there is no regulations in force which modifies the requirements for the
processing of special category data (laid down in Part 2 of Schedule 2) pursuant to Article 26 of Schedule 2.
1614
     Article 4 and Schedule 3 to the Data Protection Law 2005.
1615
     Article 6(3)I and Article 22(2)I Data Protection Law.
1616
     Where the core activities consist of processing special categories of data on a large scale, see Article 24(1)I
Data Protection Law.
1617
     Where special categories of data are processed on a large scale, see Article 16(5) Data Protection Law.

                                                       217
In terms of rights, Part 6 of the Data Protection Law provides individuals with all of the key
data protection rights, i.e., the rights of access 1618 rectification 1619, and erasure 1620, and it also
provides for a right to restriction 1621 and objection 1622. The exercise of these rights is subject
to conditions that are very similar to those of the GDPR. Moreover, when compared to the
previous legislation, the Data Protection Law has strengthened the rights of individuals in
several ways, further aligning them with the GDPR. The right of access not only requires
controllers to provide individuals with information about the processing of their data (as was
already the case under the Data Protection Law 2005 1623), but also to give access to personal
data, including by providing a copy 1624. Moreover, additional grounds to object to processing
have been added 1625. For instance, individuals have a right to object to the processing of their
personal where such processing is based exclusively on grounds of public interest or on the
legitimate interest of the controller 1626. In addition, the data subject no longer has to apply to a
court to order the rectification and erasure of his or her personal data, as was required under
the Data Protection Law 2005, but instead can make a request directly to the controller1627.
Finally, the rights in relation to automated decision-making 1628 have been further strengthened
and aligned with the GDPR through the introduction of a right for individuals not to be
subject to a decision that is based solely on automated processing and that produces legal
effects or similarly significantly affects the individual 1629. Such automated decision-making
may only take place under certain conditions (e.g., only where authorised by law or based on
the data subject’s explicit consent) and subject to suitable safeguards, including the possibility
to obtain human intervention 1630. In addition, the Data Protection Law introduced a right to
data portability that corresponds to the same right available under the GDPR 1631.

As it is the case in the GDPR, transparency requirements and data subject rights in Jersey are
subject to certain restrictions intended to allow the balancing of the data protection interests of
individuals with objectives of general public interest and with the fundamental rights and
freedoms of others.

These restrictions are set out in Part 7 of the Data Protection Law. Some of them are based on
the nature of the personal data being processed and apply automatically whenever one of the
listed categories of personal data is being processed. These categories cover a narrowly
construed set of situations, such as information that the controller is obliged under any


1618
     Article 28 Data Protection Law.
1619
     Article 31 Data Protection Law.
1620
     Article 32 Data Protection Law.
1621
     Article 33 Data Protection Law.
1622
     Articles 35 to 37 Data Protection Law. The Jersey Data Protection Laws grants a right to object in three
situations: where processing takes place in the public interest, for direct marketing purposes, and for historical or
scientific purposes.
1623
     Article 7 Data Protection Law 2005.
1624
     Article 28(3)(a) Data Protection Law.
1625
     Pursuant to Articles 10 and 11 Data Protection Law 2005, the data subject was entitled to request from the
controller to cease or not to begin any processing that would be likely to cause unwarranted damage or distress to
him or to another, and any processing for purposes of direct marketing.
1626
     Article 35 Data Protection Law.
1627
     Article 31 Data Protection Law.
1628
     Article 12 Data Protection Law 2005.
1629
     Article 38 Data Protection Law.
1630
     Article 38(2) and (3) Data Protection Law.
1631
     Article 34 Data Protection Law.

                                                        218
enactment to make available to the public 1632, personal data processed for purposes of
assessing a person’s suitability for judicial appointments or appointments by the Crown1633,
the provision of references in confidence by the controller in the context of the education,
employment or appointment of the data subject 1634, or personal data recorded by a candidate
during an academic, professional or other examination 1635. These categories are not only very
limited in scope, but also do not typically cover situations where personal data is transferred
to Jersey from the EU.

In the majority of cases, the restrictions are based on a prejudice standard. Namely, they can
be invoked only if - and to the extent that - the application of the provisions “would be likely
to prejudice” the legitimate aim pursued. For example, controllers can restrict data subject
rights if their application would be likely to prejudice the combat effectiveness of the armed
forces of the Crown 1636, or where personal data is processed for the purposes of the
prevention, detection, or investigation of a crime or the assessment or collection of any tax or
duty, and the application of the requirements or rights would be likely to prejudice that
purpose 1637.

The Jersey Office of the Information Commissioner (JOIC) has issued interpretative guidance
that clearly frames the application of the exemptions It further clarifies the scope of the
different exemptions, which helps to prevent them from being understood and applied in an
overly broad manner, and explains how the requirements of necessity and proportionality
should be applied with respect to a specific exemption 1638.

With respect to international transfers of personal data, i.e., concerning the potential onward
transfer of personal data that has been transferred from the EU, Jersey has reorganised and
clarified its transfer regime. It has put in place a system that is very similar to the rules on
international transfers set out in Chapter V of the GDPR in terms of structure and
requirements. Article 66 of the Data Protection Law lays down the general principle for cross-
border data transfers, permitting them only if the third country or international organisation
provides an adequate level of protection. The level of protection is considered adequate if the

1632
     Article 51 Data Protection Law.
1633
     Article 55 Data Protection Law.
1634
     Article 53 Data Protection Law.
1635
     Article 54 Data Protection Law.
1636
     Article 56 Data Protection Law.
1637
     Article 45(1)(a) and (c) Data Protection Law.
1638
     Jersey Office of the Information Commissioner, Guidance note on exemptions of November 2021, available
at: https://jerseyoic.org/media/44kldaym/joic-29a-exemptions-nov21-4.pdf. First, the guidance clarifies that
controllers “must consider each exemption on a case-by-case basis because the exemptions only permit […] to
depart from the [Data Protection Law’s] general requirements to the minimum extent necessary to protect the
particular functions or activities the exemptions concern.” Second, the JOIC makes clear that controllers have to
assess whether it is necessary and proportionate to invoke an exemption in relation to the specific data subject
right and the specific set of personal data in question: Controllers “should not routinely rely on exemptions or
apply them in a blanket fashion – it must be appropriate in the circumstances of the particular request that has
been made […]. Similarly, any exemption should only be applied in reference to the specific […] right, the
exercise of which would prejudice the interest in question (i.e., a controller’s interests in respect of (for example)
management forecasting could be prejudiced by the release of information in response to a subject access request
but may not be prejudiced in respect of a request for rectification).” Third, with respect to the prejudice test, the
JOIC explains that in order to rely on the restriction, “the harm must also be “likely” to prejudice that is to say, it
must be more than a theoretical risk and the controller must be able to evidence why this is likely the case. […]
There must be more than a mere assertion or belief that disclosure would lead to prejudice.” Instead, the
prejudice test is a high threshold, requiring a “very significant and weighty chance of prejudice”.

                                                         219
European Commission has adopted an adequacy decision pursuant to Article 45 of the
GDPR 1639, if appropriate safeguards as described in Article 67 have been put in place, or if
the transfer falls within the scope of one of the exceptions listed in Schedule 3 of the Data
Protection Law 1640.

Article 67 sets out the conditions for putting in place appropriate safeguards, requiring in
particular that enforceable data subject rights and effective legal remedies for data subjects
comparable to those under the Data Protection Law must be available in the third country or
organization. The instruments that can be used to provide appropriate safeguards are similar
to those provided in Article 46 of the GDPR: (1) a legally binding and enforceable agreement
between public authorities, (2) binding corporate rules 1641, (3) standard data protection
clauses 1642, (4) a code of conduct approved by another authority under the GDPR, and (5) a
certification mechanism either approved by Regulations under the Data Protection Law or
approved by another authority under the GDPR 1643.

Moreover, under the conditions laid down in Article 67(3), personal data can be transferred
subject to the specific authorisation of the JOIC 1644. Article 67(4) explicitly requires the JOIC
to take into account any opinions or decisions of the EDPB in determining whether to
authorise a transfer. In this area, Jersey has thus ensured that beyond the alignment of the law
itself, also the interpretation of the law remains in line with the interpretation within the EU.

Finally, Schedule 3 of the Data Protection Law provides an exhaustive list of narrowly
defined exceptions to the conditions for cross-border transfers laid down in Articles 66 and
67 1645. These exceptions overlap to a large extent with the derogations for specific situations
listed in Article 49 of the GDPR, and their interpretation by the JOIC is also aligned with the
EU. In its guidance on international transfers, the JOIC confirms that the exceptions are for
1639
     While the Jersey Data Protection Law does not explicitly require that such adequacy finding is still in force,
Jersey is in practice taking into account whether an adequacy decision adopted by the Commission is valid or
not. After the EU-U.S. Privacy Shield was invalidated by the Court of Justice of the European Union, the JOIC
alerted organisations in Jersey that they could no longer rely on the Privacy Shield for their transfers of personal
data. See press release of 22 July 2020, available at: https://jerseyoic.org/blogs/eu-us-privacy-shield-
invalidation/.
1640
     Article 66(1) and (2) Data Protection Law.
1641
     Binding corporate rules can be approved by the JOIC if they fulfil the requirements set by Schedule 4 of the
Data Protection Law or can be approved by one of the authorities in the EU on the basis of the GDPR. So far, the
JOIC has not approved any binding corporate rules.
1642
     While the JOIC has not yet approved any such clauses, data exporters in Jersey can rely on the Standard
Contractual Clauses adopted by the European Commission, see also the JOIC’s guidance note on international
transfers of January 2021, p. 4, available at: https://jerseyoic.org/media/nsajlxvj/joic-international-transfers-
guidance-21-01-2021.pdf.
1643
     An approved code of conduct or an approved certification mechanisms have to be each combined with
binding and enforceable commitments of the recipient to apply the relevant safeguards in the mechanism,
including as regards data subject rights.
1644
     A specific authorisation can be granted if appropriate safeguards are ensured by contractual clauses or by
administrative arrangements between public authorities, and there is a mechanism in place for data subjects to
enforce their data subject rights and obtain effective legal remedies against the recipient, see Article 67(3)(a) and
(b) Data Protection Law.
1645
     Pursuant to Schedule 3 of the Data Protection Law, personal data may be transferred for instance where
required by an order or a judgment of a court or tribunal having the force of law in Jersey, where required by a
decision of a Jersey public authority based on an international agreement imposing an international obligation on
Jersey, where explicit consent of the individual has been obtained, where necessary for the performance of a
contract with or in the interest of a data subject, where the transfer is necessary for reasons of substantial public
interest or where necessary to protect the vital interests of the data subject or of another individual and explicit
consent cannot be obtained from the data subject.

                                                        220
specific situations, should only be used if it is not possible to rely on an adequacy decision or
to put in place appropriate safeguards, and that organisations should take into account the
EDPB’s guidance on derogations 1646.

       1.2. Oversight, enforcement and redress

Jersey has also reformed its system of oversight and enforcement of the Data Protection Law,
strengthening both the independence and the powers of the oversight body.

Under the Data Protection Authority Law, oversight and enforcement is carried out by the
Data Protection Authority (the Authority) 1647, which replaces the Commissioner under the
Data Protection Law 2005 1648. The Authority is composed of a chairperson, three to eight
other voting members (the Members), and a commissioner (an ex officio and non-voting
member) 1649. Importantly, a statutory guarantee of the Authority’s independence has been
introduced in the Data Protection Authority Law, which requires it to act independently and in
a manner free from direct or indirect external influence 1650. In addition, the Authority now
enjoys the status of a legal person separate from its members 1651.

The Authority’s Members are appointed by the Chief Minister, who must present, at least two
weeks prior to the appointment, to the States Assembly (i.e., the Jersey Parliament) a reasoned
report about his intention to appoint 1652. It is required by Law that the Minister must have
particular regard to the need to ensure that Members have the qualifications, experience and
skills necessary to exercise and perform the functions of a Member, in particular relating to
the protection of personal data, as well as a strong sense of integrity and the ability to
maintain confidentiality 1653. The appointments are overseen by the Jersey Appointments
Commission1654.


1646
     Jersey Office of the Information Commissioner, Guidance note on international transfers, January 2021,
available at: https://jerseyoic.org/media/nsajlxvj/joic-international-transfers-guidance-21-01-2021.pdf.
1647
     The Authority is established by Article 2 of the Data Protection Authority Law 2018. Its general functions
include oversight and enforcement of the Data Protection Law, promoting awareness (among the public,
controllers and processors), as well as issuing opinions, guidance and public statements. In addition, the
Authority may engage in international co-operation, including by developing international cooperation
mechanisms and providing international mutual assistance. See Articles 11 and 13 to 16 Data Protection
Authority Law.
1648
     Prior to 2018, the Office of the Information Commissioner was a non-ministerial department of the
Government of Jersey and subject to Government oversight, see Annual Report of the Jersey Data Protection
Authority 2018, p. 10, available at: https://jerseyoic.org/media/g4ahgcwh/joic-annual-report-2018.pdf. The
powers and duties of the Commissioner were set out in Part 6 Data Protection Law 2005.
1649
     Article 3(1) Data Protection Authority Law. At present, the Authority is composed of a chairperson and five
voting members.
1650
     Article 12 Data Protection Authority Law. Also, the Authority’s Corporate Governance Protocol, adopted in
2019, notes that it is important that the Authority is, in appearance and reality, an independent regulator capable
of holding both the States and Government of Jersey to account. The Protocol is available at:
https://jerseyoic.org/media/u1tgkgmb/jersey-data-protection-authority-governance-protocol-2019.pdf.
1651
     According to Article 2(2) Data Protection Authority Law, the Authority is established as a body corporate.
This means that the Authority can directly employ staff, where in the past it relied on the government to do so
and could only employ civil servants, and that it can separate its banking arrangements and internal audits from
the government. See the Authority’s Corporate Governance Protocol 2019, p. 5, and Annual Report 2018 of the
Office of the Data Protection Authority, p. 13.
1652
     Article 3 Data Protection Authority Law. See for instance the Chief Minister’s report on the appointment of
the Authority’s Chairman, available at: https://statesassembly.gov.je/assemblyreports/2018/r.38-2018.pdf.
1653
     Article 3(2) Data Protection Authority Law. An individual is ineligible to be a voting member if the
individual is, or has at any time during the preceding 12 months been, a member of the States of Jersey, or if

                                                       221
The Commissioner is the Chief Executive of the Authority, in charge of its day-to-day
operations and responsible for managing other employees. The role of the Commissioner is in
principle incompatible with any other employment, business or occupation. The
Commissioner is appointed by the Members of the Authority and holds office for a
(renewable) term of 5 years 1655.

Members can be removed from office by the Chief Minister, but only if the specific
conditions for dismissal that are listed exhaustively in the Law are met and if the States are
informed at least two weeks in advance of the intended removal 1656. The conditions for the
dismissal of the Commissioner by the Authority are equally set out in the Law 1657.

Compared to the previous regime - regarding which the Article 29 Working Party had raised
some questions concerning the extent of the Commissioner’s investigatory and enforcement
powers 1658 - the Data Protection Authority Law has significantly strengthened the Authority’s
powers that are now very similar to those foreseen in the GDPR. In particular, the Authority
can conduct audits 1659, investigate individual complaints 1660 and carry out general inquiries on
its own initiative 1661. In carrying out its functions, the Authority has access to all relevant
information, including the power to enter and search premises, to seize devices and
information, to inspect etc. 1662. Upon finding of a violation of the Data Protection Law, the
authority can impose various sanctions, ranging from warnings and reprimands to binding




she/he is a States’ employee or is otherwise under the direction and control of the States, or otherwise engaged in
any employment, occupation (whether or not remunerated) or business, or receives any benefits, that is
incompatible with the functions of a member of the Authority, see Article 3(6) Data Protection Authority Law.
1654
     The Jersey Appointments Commission is an independent body that oversees the recruitment of States’
employees and appointees to States supported or related bodies. On its involvement in the appointment of
Members of the Jersey Data Protection Authority, see for instance the Jersey Appointments Commission annual
report                    2018,                 p.                7,                  available                 at:
https://www.gov.je/Government/Departments/OfficeChiefExecutive/OfficeChiefExecutivesSections/JerseyAppo
intmentsCommission/Pages/AnnualReports.aspx
1655
     Articles 5 and 6 Data Protection Authority Law.
1656
     Members can only be dismissed on grounds of serious misconduct, conviction of a criminal offence,
bankruptcy, incapacity because of physical or mental illness, other inability to perform their duties, or
ineligibility, see Article 4(1) Data Protection Authority Law. A member can only be removed from office on the
basis of serious misconduct if a panel consisting of three or more individuals appointed by the Authority and
other than a member of the Authority, of the States or the Minister determines the Member to be guilty of a
serious misconduct, see Article 4(1)(a) Data Protection Authority Law.
1657
     Article 5 Data Protection Authority Law. The Commissioner can only be removed on grounds of serious
misconduct, conviction of a criminal offence, bankruptcy, physical or mental illness, or if otherwise unable or
unfit to perform the Commissioner’s duties. Again, he or she can only be removed on the basis of serious
misconduct if a panel consisting of three or more individuals appointed by the Authority and other than a
member of the Authority or the Minister determines the Commissioner to be guilty of a serious misconduct, see
Article 5(1)(a) Data Protection Authority Law.
1658
     Opinion 8/2007 on the level of protection of personal data in Jersey (WP141), see footnote 2, p. 10. In
particular, the Working Party was concerned that the Commissioner’s powers were more limited than those set
out in the Data Protection Directive, and that the Commissioner needed a warrant by a judicial authority to gain
access to premises and gather information.
1659
     Paragraph 7 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Authority Law.
1660
     Article 20 Data Protection Authority Law.
1661
     Article 21 Data Protection Authority Law.
1662
     Paragraphs 1 and 2 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Authority Law.

                                                       222
orders (for instance to discontinue processing, bring processing into compliance with the Law,
rectify, erase or restrict processing or suspend the transfer of personal data) 1663.

Moreover, the Authority can impose administrative fines for certain violations of the Law1664.
The fines must be effective, proportionate and have a deterrent effect 1665. As regards the
amount of fines, the Authority has to take into account the same factors as those listed in
Article 83(2) GDPR, i.e., the intentional or negligent character of the infringement, any action
taken by the controller or processor to mitigate the damage suffered by data subjects, duration
of the infringement etc. 1666. In addition, several violations of the Data Protection Law
continue to constitute offences and may therefore be subject to criminal sanctions 1667.

As regards possibilities for individuals to obtain redress, the Jersey system continues to offer
various avenues, including the possibility to lodge a complaint with the Authority for any
possible breach of the Data Protection Law 1668, to obtain judicial redress directly against
controllers with respect to any alleged or potential violation of the transparency and subject
rights provisions of the Jersey Data Protection Law 1669 and to obtain compensation for
damages 1670. In addition, individuals can obtain judicial redress against decisions of the
Authority 1671.

Despite its relatively small size, the Authority plays an active role. Each year it handles a
number of files, including enquiries, complaints, investigations and data breach notifications.
In 2019, the Authority received 89 enquiries and 145 complaints. With respect to those
complaints that required further action, the organisations concerned either took measures to
resolve the complaint on their own account and those measures were deemed satisfactory,
organisations were required to implement measures recommended by the Authority, or the
complaints could be resolved through the provision of information to the Authority. In several
cases the Authority issued warnings, informing organisations that any further breach of the


1663
     Article 25 Data Protection Authority Law. Failure to comply with an order from the Authority is an offence
under the Law, see Article 25(8) of the Law.
1664
     These violations are (1) failure to make reasonable efforts to verify that a person giving consent to the
processing of the personal data of a child as required by Article 11(4) Data Protection Law is a person duly
authorized to give consent to that processing in accordance with that provision; (2) breach of any duty or
obligation imposed by Article 7 of, and any provision of Parts 3, 4 or 5 of, the Data Protection Law; (3)
processing personal data in breach of any other provision of Part 2 or 6 of the Data Protection Law; or (4)
transfer of personal data to a person in a third country or international organisation in contravention of Article 66
or 67 Data Protection Law (Article 26(1) Data Protection Authority Law).
1665
     Article 26(3) Data Protection Authority Law. Article 27(2) Data Protection Authority Law sets the threshold
for administrative fines at £300 000 or 10% of the organisation’s total global annual turnover or total gross
income in the preceding financial year, whichever is the higher. In addition, for violations of Articles 26(1)(a)
and (b), the fine cannot exceed £5 000 000, while for violations of Article 26(1) (c) and (d) it cannot exceed £10
000 000, see Article 27(1) Data Protection Authority Law.
1666
     Article 26(2) Data Protection Authority Law.
1667
     This for example applies to processing personal data without being registered with the Authority as
controller or processor (Article 17(3) Data Protection Authority Law), failing to comply with an order of the
Authority (Article 25(8) Data Protection Authority Law), knowingly or recklessly obtaining or disclosing
personal data without the consent of the relevant controller (Article 71(2) Data Protection Law) providing false
or misleading information to the Authority (Article 73(1) Data Protection Law), and obstructing an Authority
official (Article 74(3) Data Protection Law).
1668
     Article 19 Data Protection Authority Law.
1669
     Article 68 Data Protection Law.
1670
     Article 69 Data Protection Law.
1671
     Article 31 Data Protection Authority Law.

                                                        223
law may be subject to formal sanctions 1672. In 2020, the Authority handled 106 enquiries and
140 complaints. In 60 cases, the Authority’s investigation revealed contraventions of the Data
Protection Law, which were remedied further to recommendations given by the Authority.
Two cases were considered serious enough to warrant the issuing of public statements 1673. In
terms of outreach, the Authority organises a “Data Protection Week” each year in which it
provides information and advice to a large audience, covering topics such as requests for
access to data, surveillance in the workplace and data transfers 1674. It also engages in outreach
activities on an ongoing basis, such as presentations and courses for instance on data security
for small businesses, on issues relating to the collection of employee data or on how to handle
data breaches 1675. Finally, the Authority provides a significant amount of information online,
including toolkits and practical advice, addressing typical questions that organisations and
individuals may face.

2. ACCESS TO AND USE OF PERSONAL DATA TRANSFERRED FROM THE
   EUROPEAN UNION BY PUBLIC AUTHORITIES IN JERSEY

       2.1. General legal framework

The limitations and safeguards that apply to the collection and subsequent use of personal
data for purposes of criminal law enforcement and national security follow from Jersey’s
international obligations in the area of fundamental rights and personal data protection, from
the rules that apply to the processing of personal data by the public sector, as well as from
specific laws regulating access to data by Jersey public authorities.

First, as an exercise of power by a public authority, government access in Jersey must be
carried out in full respect of the law. The ratification of the European Convention of Human
Rights by the United Kingdom has been extended to Jersey since 1953 1676. The right to
respect for private and family life (and the right to data protection as part of that right) is
protected by the Human Rights (Bailiwick of Jersey) Law 2000, which incorporates the
majority of rights under the European Convention on Human Rights into Jersey law1677.
Article 8 of the Convention provides that any interference with privacy must be in accordance
with the law, in the interests of one of the aims set out in Article 8(2) and proportionate in
light of that aim. Article 8 also requires that the interference is “foreseeable”, i.e., have a
clear, accessible basis in law, and that the law contains appropriate safeguards to prevent
abuse.




1672
     See Annual report 2019, available at: https://jerseyoic.org/media/jydftlzx/joic-annualreport-2019.pdf.
1673
     See Annual report 2020, available at: https://jerseyoic.org/media/f0gfxnkx/joic-annualreport-2020-final.pdf.
1674
     For more information on the Data Protection Weeks in 2019 and 2020, see Annual report 2019, p. 40, and
Annual report 2020, p. 41.
1675
     For recent courses and presentations, see for example the events set out on the website of the Authority,
available at: https://jerseyoic.org/events/.
1676
     See Declaration contained in a letter from the United Kingdom’s Permanent Representative to the Council of
Europe, dated 23 October 1953, registered at the Secretariat General on 23 October 1953 – available at:
https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list2?module=declarations-by-treaty&numSte=005&codeNature=0.
1677
     Article 1(1) and 2(1) Human Rights (Bailiwick of Jersey) Law 2000.

                                                      224
In addition, in its case law 1678, the European Court of Human Rights has specified that any
interference with the right to privacy and data protection should be subject to an effective,
independent and impartial oversight system that must be provided for either by a judge or by
another independent body 1679 (e.g., an administrative authority or a parliamentary body).

Moreover, individuals must be provided with an effective remedy, and the European Court of
Human Rights has clarified that the remedy must be offered by an independent and impartial
body which has adopted its own rules of procedure, consisting of members that must hold or
have held high judicial office or be experienced lawyers, and that there must be no evidential
burden to be overcome in order to lodge an application with it. In undertaking its examination
of complaints by individuals, the independent and impartial body should have access to all
relevant information, including closed materials. Finally, it should have the powers to remedy
non-compliance 1680.

Second, the Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to
Automatic Processing of Personal Data (Convention 108) also applies in Jersey 1681. Article 9
of Convention 108 provides that derogations from the general data protection principles, the
rules governing special categories of data and data subject rights are only permissible when
such derogation is provided for by the law of the Party and constitutes a necessary measure in
a democratic society in the interests of protecting State security, public safety, the monetary
interests of the State or the suppression of criminal offences, or for protecting the data subject
or the rights and freedoms of others.

Therefore, through adherence to the European Convention of Human Rights and to
Convention 108, Jersey is subject to a number of obligations, enshrined in international law
and that frame its system of government access on the basis of principles, safeguards and
individual rights similar to those guaranteed under EU law and applicable to the Member
States. Furthermore, as far as the ECHR is concerned, compliance with these obligations is
subject to the judicial control of the European Court of Human Rights.

Third, the Jersey Parliament has adopted specific provisions for the processing of personal
data in the law enforcement context, i.e., the Data Protection (Jersey) Law 2018, as modified
by Schedule 1 to the Law 1682. The material scope of the Data Protection Law is similar to the

1678
     According to Article 2(1)(a) Human Rights (Bailiwick of Jersey) Law 2000, a court or tribunal in Jersey that
is determining a question which has arisen in connection with a Convention right must take into account any
judgment, decision, declaration or advisory opinion of the European Court of Human Rights.
1679
     European Court of Human Rights, Klass and others v. Germany, Application no. 5029/71, paragraphs 17-51.
1680
     European Court of Human Rights, Kennedy v. the United Kingdom, Application no. 26839/05, (Kennedy),
paragraphs 167 and 190.
1681
     Declaration contained in a letter from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to the Council of
Europe, dated 26 August 1987, handed to the Secretary General at the time of deposit of the instrument of
ratification,   on    26     August       1987,    available  at:   https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-
list?module=declarations-by-treaty&numSte=108&codeNature=0.
1682
      Pursuant to Article 4(5) Data Protection Law, Schedule 1 modifies the Data Protection Law where
processing is carried out by a competent authority and for a law enforcement purpose. The modifications reflect
the differences between obligations set out in the GDPR and the Law Enforcement Directive. Competent
authorities in Jersey are listed non-exhaustively in Paragraph1 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law and
include the Jersey Police, Health and Social Services, Social Services Department, Department for Infrastructure,
Social Security Department, Health & Safety Inspectorate, Income Tax Department, Jersey Customs &
Immigration Service Jersey Financial Services Commission, Jersey Fire and Rescue Service, Jersey Gambling
Commission, Jersey Police Complaints Authority, Jersey Probation Service, Judicial Greffe, The Law Officers’

                                                      225
one of the GDPR. It applies to the processing of personal data by both commercial and public
entities 1683. Furthermore, the data protection principles of lawfulness and fairness 1684, purpose
limitation1685, data minimisation 1686, accuracy 1687, storage limitation 1688 and security1689 are
retained in the Data Protection Law, as modified by Schedule 1, in similar terms as in the Law
Enforcement Directive. In essence, the processing of personal data by a competent authority
for a law enforcement purpose is permitted only if it is authorised by law and either the data
subject has given its consent, or the processing is necessary for the performance of a task
carried out by the controller for a law enforcement purpose 1690. In addition, the Data
Protection Law as modified by Schedule 1 imposes specific transparency obligations 1691 and
recognises the same data subject rights as the LED 1692. In particular, individuals enjoy a right
of access 1693, correction 1694 and deletion 1695 and have the right not to be subject to automated

Department, the Ports of Jersey etc. Pursuant to Article 1(1) Data Protection Law, a law enforcement purpose
covers the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal
penalties, including the safeguarding against, and the prevention of, threats to public security.
1683
     The Jersey data protection regime applies to the processing of personal data in the context of a controller or
processor established in Jersey, see Article 4(2)(a) Data Protection Law. The Law does not apply to the
processing of personal data by natural persons in the course of a purely personal or household activity, see
Article 4(1) Data Protection Law.
1684
     Article 8(1)(a) Data Protection Law. The processing of personal data by a competent authority for a law
enforcement purpose is permitted only to the extent it is permitted by law and (1) the data subject has given
consent, (2) the processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried out by a controller for a law
enforcement purpose, see Article 9 Data Protection Law as modified by paragraph 4 of Schedule 1 to the Data
Protection Law.
1685
     Article 8(1)(b) Data Protection Law. Article 13 of the Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 7 of
Schedule 1, allows for further processing of data for criminal law enforcement purposes only if the controller is
authorised by law to process the data for the other purpose and the processing is necessary and proportionate to
that other purpose.
1686
     Article 8(1)I Data Protection Law.
1687
     Article 8(1)(d) Data Protection Law. In addition, as required also by the Law Enforcement Directive,
competent authorities must make a clear distinction between personal data relating to different categories of data
subjects, such as persons suspected of having committed an offence, persons convicted of a criminal offence,
persons who are victims of a criminal offence and witnesses, see Article 13(3) Data Protection Law, as modified
by paragraph 7 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law.
1688
     Article 8(1)I Data Protection Law.
1689
     Article 8(1)(f) Data Protection Law.
1690
     Article 9(1) Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 4 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law.
Pursuant to Article 9(2) Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 4 of Schedule 1, stricter conditions apply
to the processing of special category data. The processing of such data is only lawful if and to the extent that it is
permitted by law and (1) is strictly necessary, subject to appropriate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of the
data subject; (2) serves to protect the vital interests of the data subject or another individual; or (3) the processing
relates to data that are manifestly made public by the data subject.
1691
     Article 12 Data Protection Law, as substituted by paragraph 6 of Schedule 1 requires that data subjects are
provided with information on the identity and contact details of the controller/controller’s representative and the
data protection officer, the purposes for processing, the recipients or categories of recipients of personal data,
where applicable the intention to transfer data to a third country, the period for which personal data will be
stored, data subject rights, the right to lodge a complaint with the Data Protection Authority, etc.
1692
     Similarly to Article 12 Law Enforcement Directive, Article 27 Data Protection Law, as modified by
paragraph 12 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law, further specifies the modalities for exercising these
rights, allowing competent authorities to refuse to comply with a request from an individual or to charge a
reasonable fee for complying with the request if the request is manifestly unfounded, frivolous, vexatious,
unnecessarily repetitive or otherwise excessive.
1693
     Article 28 Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 13 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law. In
addition, Article 28 provides individuals with a right to obtain a confirmation as to whether or not personal data
relating to the individual is being processed, as well as to access that data and obtain information relating to its
processing (e.g., on the purpose, categories of personal data concerned, the source of the personal data, the
recipients, etc.).
1694
     Article 31 Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 14 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law.
1695
     Article 32 Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 15 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law.

                                                         226
decision-making 1696. Competent authorities are also required to implement data protection by
design and default 1697, to keep records of processing activities 1698, and, in certain situations, to
carry out data protection impact assessments and to pre-consult the Data Protection
Authority 1699. Moreover, they are required to put in place appropriate measures to ensure
security of processing 1700 and are subject to specific obligations in case of a data breach,
including notification of such breaches to the Authority and data subjects 1701. Like in the Law
Enforcement Directive, there is also a requirement for a controller (unless it is a court or other
judicial authority acting in a judicial capacity) to designate a data protection officer who
assists the controller in complying with its obligations as well as monitoring that
compliance 1702. Finally, the Data Protection Law, as modified by Schedule 1, contains
specific provisions on international transfers of personal data 1703. The provisions substantially
echo those in the Law Enforcement Directive. Essentially, transfers to a third country or an
international organisation are prohibited unless they are necessary for a law enforcement
purpose and based either on an adequacy decision adopted by the European Commission in
accordance with Article 37 Law Enforcement Directive or on appropriate safeguards 1704. In
the absence of an adequacy decision and appropriate safeguards, transfers to unauthorised
jurisdictions are only possible in specific circumstances that are listed in the law in an
exhaustive manner and correspond to the ‘derogations’ set forth in the Law Enforcement
Directive 1705.

Under similar conditions as under the Law Enforcement Directive, Schedule 1 to the Data
Protection Law specifies that certain specific provisions of the Data Protection Law 1706 may
be restricted to the extent that and for as long as the restriction is a necessary and
1696
     Article 38 Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 18 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law.
1697
     Article 15 Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 8 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law.
1698
     Article 14 Data Protection Law.
1699
     Articles 16 and 17 Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 9 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection
Law.
1700
     Article 21 Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 11 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law. This
includes additional requirements in relation to automated decision making and requiring logs of processing
operations to be kept, as required by the Law Enforcement Directive.
1701
     Article 20 Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 10 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law.
1702
     Article 24 Data Protection Law.
1703
     Articles 66 to 67C Data Protection Law, as substituted by paragraph 19 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection
Law.
1704
     Article 66(2) in conjunction with Article 67A Data Protection Law, as substituted by Article 19 of Schedule
1. Appropriate safeguards are in place where provided by a legal instrument binding the intended recipient, such
as a legally binding and enforceable agreement between the controller and the recipient, or where the controller,
having assessed all the circumstances surrounding the transfer, concludes that appropriate safeguards exist to
protect the data. The controller is required to keep detailed written records of any transfer relying on appropriate
safeguards, and when relying on appropriate safeguards on the basis of the circumstances surrounding the
transfer, the controller must notify the Authority of the categories of data transferred on that basis.
1705
     Article 67B Data Protection Law as substituted by paragraph 19 of Schedule 1 sets out the special
circumstances in which international transfers can take place in the absence of appropriate safeguards, i.e. for the
protection of vital interests of individuals, to safeguard legitimate interests of the data subject, to prevent
immediate and serious threats to the public security of any country, in individual cases for a law enforcement
purpose, and in individual cases for a legal purpose.
1706
     The provisions that may be restricted are those that concern: the notification of data breaches (Article 20
Data Protection Law as modified by paragraph 10 of Schedule 1); the right of access (Article 28 Data Protection
Law as modified by paragraph 13 of Schedule 1); the right to rectification (Article 31 Data Protection Law, as
modified by paragraph 14 of Schedule 1, permits the controller to refrain from informing the data subject about a
refusal of rectification in certain circumstances); and the right to erasure and the right to restriction (Articles 32
and 33 Data Protection Law as modified by paragraphs 15 and 16 of Schedule 1 permit the controller to refrain
from informing the data subject about a refusal of erasure or restriction in certain circumstances).

                                                        227
proportionate measure for one of the purposes listed in the law, having regard to the
fundamental rights and legitimate interests of the data subject concerned 1707.

Moreover, Part 7 of the Data Protection Law imposes restrictions to specific provisions of the
Law 1708. First, Part 7 allows the restriction of individual rights based on the nature of the
personal data being processed. These restrictions apply automatically whenever one of the
listed categories of personal data is being processed. These categories are listed in an
exhaustive manner and cover a very limited, narrowly construed set of situations, which are to
a large extent irrelevant in a law enforcement context. In addition, they do not typically cover
situations where personal data is transferred to Jersey from the EU 1709. Second, Part 7 sets out
restrictions on grounds of prejudice. They can be invoked only when and to the extent that the
application of the provisions “would be likely to prejudice” the legitimate aim pursued. For
example, controllers can restrict data subject rights to the extent that their application would
be likely to prejudice the combat effectiveness of the armed forces of the Crown 1710, or would
be likely to prejudice the prevention, detection, or investigation of crime 1711. As explained in
section 1.1., the JOIC has issued interpretative guidance that clearly frames the application of
the restrictions. It clarifies the scope of the different restrictions, including by means of
examples, which helps to prevent them from being misunderstood and applied in an overly
broad manner. It also explains how the requirements of necessity and proportionality should
be applied with respect to these specific restrictions 1712.

The processing of personal data for national security purposes in Jersey is subject to the
provisions of the Data Protection Law. As explained above, the Data Protection Law applies
to the processing of personal data by both private entities and by public authorities, including
for the purpose of safeguarding against or preventing threats to national security. While the
Law provides for an exemption from specified provisions 1713 for national security purposes,

1707
     These purposes are to avoid obstructing official or legal inquiries, investigations or procedures; to avoid
prejudicing the prevention, detection, investigation or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of
criminal penalties; to protect public security; to protect national security; or to protect the significant interests of
others. In case of restriction, the controller must provide the data subject as soon as practicable with a statement
informing about the restriction, along with the reasons and the possible redress avenue.
1708
     Most exemptions allow the restriction of data subject rights and transparency provisions.
1709
     The exemptions apply automatically to personal data covered by legal professional privilege, see Article 57
Data Protection Law.
1710
     Article 56 Data Protection Law.
1711
     Article 45 Data Protection Law.
1712
     Jersey Office of the Information Commissioner, Guidance note on exemptions of November 2021, available
at: https://jerseyoic.org/media/44kldaym/joic-29a-exemptions-nov21-4.pdf. First, the guidance clarifies that
controllers “must consider each exemption on a case-by-case basis because the exemptions only permit you [i.e.,
as a data controller] to depart from the Data Protection Law’s general requirements to the minimum extent
necessary to protect the particular functions or activities the exemptions concern.” Second, the JOIC makes clear
that controllers have to assess whether it is necessary and proportionate to invoke an exemption in relation to the
specific data subject right and the specific set of personal data in question: Controllers “should not routinely rely
on exemptions or apply them in a blanket fashion – it must be appropriate in the circumstances of the particular
request that has been made […]. Similarly, any exemption should only be applied in reference to the specific
[…] right, the exercise of which would prejudice the interest in question” Third, with respect to the prejudice
test, the JOIC explains that in order to rely on the restriction, “the harm must also be “likely” to prejudice that is
to say, it must be more than a theoretical risk and the controller must be able to evidence why this is likely the
case. […] There must be more than a mere assertion or belief that disclosure would lead to prejudice.” Instead,
the prejudice test is a high threshold, requiring a “very significant and weighty chance of prejudice”.
1713
     Pursuant to Article 41 Data Protection Law, the processing of personal data necessary for the purpose of
safeguarding national security can in particular be exempt from the data protection principles and provisions on
transparency and data subject rights and from certain parts of the Data Protection Authority Law.

                                                         228
these provisions may only be restricted to the extent it is necessary to safeguard national
security. In addition, the application of these exemptions has been clarified through detailed
guidance. As recalled above for restrictions applicable in the field of criminal law
enforcement, in particular, relying on the exemption is only allowed to the minimum extent
necessary to protect the particular functions or activities the exemptions concern. The
exemption cannot be invoked in a blanket manner but can be relied upon only on the basis of
a case-by-case analysis and considering the actual consequences of applying the relevant
provision. All decisions to rely on an exemption have to be documented and controllers must
be prepared to share that documentation with the Data Protection Authority 1714.

Moreover, according to Article 41(2) of the Data Protection Law, a certificate signed by the
Minister for Home Affairs can confirm the legality of the reliance on the national security
restriction 1715. That means that the certificate serves as conclusive evidence of the fact that a
restriction from one or more provision specified in the certificate is required for the purposes
of national security. It is important to note that the national security certificate does not
provide for an additional ground for restricting data protection rights and obligations for
national security reasons. In other words, the controller or processor can only rely on a
certificate when it has concluded that it is necessary to rely on the national security restriction
which, as explained above, must be applied on a case-by-case basis 1716. Even if a national
security certificate applies to the matter in question, the Jersey Data Protection Authority can
investigate whether or not reliance on the national security restriction was justified in a
specific case 1717. Moreover, any person directly affected by the issuing of a certificate may
appeal to the Royal Court. The Royal Court will review the decision to issue a certificate and
decide whether there were reasonable grounds for issuing it. As a result, the Court can quash
the certificate or determine that the certificate does not apply to specific personal data which
is the subject of the appeal 1718.

It follows from the above that limitations and conditions are in place under the applicable
Jersey legal provisions, as interpreted by the Jersey Data Protection Authority, to ensure that
these exemptions and restrictions remain within the boundaries of what is necessary and
proportionate to protect criminal law enforcement and national security.

       2.2. Access and use by Jersey public authorities for criminal law enforcement
            purposes

In Jersey, criminal law enforcement functions are primarily carried out by the States of Jersey
Police, which is headed by the Chief Officer. Jersey law imposes a number of limitations on
how law enforcement authorities have access to and use personal data for criminal law
enforcement purposes, and it also provides oversight and redress mechanisms in this area. The


1714
     See the Jersey Office of the Information Commissioner Guidance note on exemptions of November 2021, p.
4, available at: https://jerseyoic.org/media/44kldaym/joic-29a-exemptions-nov21-4.pdf.
1715
     To date, no such certificate has been issued under Jersey’s data protection framework.
1716
     See the JOIC’s guidance note on exemptions, available at: https://jerseyoic.org/resource-room/guidance-on-
exemptions/.
1717
     Article 6(1)(a) Data Protection Law requires the controller to be in a position to demonstrate that it has
complied with the law. This implies that any data controller would need to demonstrate to the Data Protection
Authority that when relying on the restriction, it has considered the specific circumstances of the case.
1718
     Article 41(4) and (5) Data Protection Law.

                                                     229
conditions under which access to personal data can take place and the safeguards applicable to
the use of these powers are assessed in the following sections.

         2.2.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

Personal data transferred under the adequacy decision and processed by organisations in
Jersey may be obtained by Jersey criminal law enforcement authorities notably by means of
investigative measures under the Police Procedures and Criminal evidence (Jersey) Law 2003
(PPCE), on the basis of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Jersey) Law 2005, or in the
context of anti-money laundering legislation 1719.

The PPCE provides the Jersey police with a legal basis for accessing personal data held by
commercial operators through searches and seizures, and production orders. The PPCE lays
down detailed rules on the scope and application of these measures, aimed at ensuring that the
interference with the rights of individuals will be limited to what is necessary for a specific
criminal investigation and proportionate to the pursued purpose. With limited exceptions,
searches and seizures may only take place on the basis of a court-issued search warrant 1720
and the issuing of such warrant is subject to specific procedural and substantive requirements.
An application for a production order requiring a person to provide the police with access to
information must also be made to a court and will also be subject to specific procedural and
substantive requirements 1721.

More specifically, a police officer may apply for a search warrant to the Bailiff or a Jurat 1722.
An application for a warrant must state the ground on which it is made and specify the
premises to be searched, as well as the articles and persons to be sought 1723.

A search warrant may be issued only if the Bailiff or Jurat is satisfied that there are reasonable
grounds to believe 1724 that (1) a serious offence 1725 has been committed of which there is


1719
     In addition, under Jersey law, UK public authorities can lawfully operate in Jersey to access personal data for
criminal law enforcement purposes where that is specifically authorised by legislation in force in Jersey (e.g.,
under the RIPL). The extent to which UK authorities can process law enforcement data that is collected in Jersey
on the basis of UK legislation is covered in the Commission Implementing Decision of 28.6.2021 pursuant to
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 on the adequate protection of personal data by the United Kingdom, available at:
https://commission.europa.eu/system/files/2021-
06/decision_on_the_adequate_protection_of_personal_data_by_the_united_kingdom_-
_general_data_protection_regulation_en.pdf.-
1720
     Pursuant to Articles 19 and 20 PPCE, warrantless searches may only take place in exceptional circumstances
that do not appear relevant in the context of data transfers covered by an adequacy decision adopted under the
GDPR. In particular, a police officer may search a premise for the purpose of (1) arresting a person whom the
officer has reasonable cause to suspect has committed an offence or where the officer has reasonable cause to
suspect that any offence is in progress on the premises or is about to be or has been committed on the premises;
(2) where the officer has reasonable cause to suspect that any person is committing, is about to commit or has
committed an offence on the premises; or (3) for the purpose of saving life or limb or preventing serious damage
to property. In addition, a warrantless search may take place on a premise occupied or controller by a person
under arrest for a serious offence, if the police have reasonable grounds to suspect that there is evidence on the
premise that relates to that offence, or a connected/similar offence.
1721
     Article 16 and Schedule 2 to PPCE.
1722
     A Bailiff is the senior judge of Jersey’s Royal Court and Jurats are elected lay judges.
1723
     Article 17(2) PPCE.
1724
     The test of ‘reasonable grounds to believe’ is an objective one. It is not necessary that there should be proof
that a criminal offence has been committed, but it requires some evidence which suggests that the crime may
have been committed. See Ashbolt v Revenue and Customs Commissioners [2020] EWHC 1588, at para 14
which has been cited with approval by the Royal Court in Jersey.

                                                       230
evidence on the premises specified in the application 1726 or (2) that there are goods on
premises specified in the application which have been unlawfully obtained 1727.

In terms of formal requirements, the warrant must specify the identity of the person who
applied for it, the date of issuance, the enactment under which it is issued, the premise to be
searched and, in as far as practicable, the articles or persons to be sought 1728. The police
officer carrying out the search must provide the occupier of the searched premise with the
warrant, or in case the latter is not present, leave a copy of the warrant 1729.

A police officer may seize and retain anything for which a search was authorised 1730. A police
officer who is lawfully on any premises may furthermore seize anything at the premise if
he/she believes on reasonable grounds that the item has been obtained as a result of
committing a crime and it is necessary to seize it in order to prevent it from being concealed,
lost, tampered with or destroyed 1731. Moreover, the police officer may require information
stored in electronic form to be produced in a form in which it can be taken away if he/she has
reasonable grounds to believe that it is evidence or has been obtained as a result of the
commission of an offence and it is necessary to do so to prevent it from being concealed, lost,
tampered with or destroyed 1732.

In addition to the powers of search and seizure described above, Article 101 PPCE allows the
Attorney General to authorise the taking of any action as the Attorney General may specify, in
respect of any property or wireless telegraphy. Such authorisation can be issued by the
Attorney General only if (s)he believes that such action is necessary for detecting or


1725
     Schedule 1 to the PPCE sets out which offences qualify as ‘serious offences’, covering for instance treason,
murder, manslaughter, rape, kidnapping etc.
1726
     The evidence must be likely to be of substantial value to the investigation of the offence, must be likely to be
relevant, and must not consist of or include items subject to legal privilege, excluded material or special
procedure material, see Article 15(2) PPCE. ‘Items subject to legal privilege’ are communications between a
professional legal adviser and the advisor’s client made in connection with the giving of legal advice to the client
or in connection with legal proceedings and items enclosed with or referred to in such communications. Items
held with the intention of furthering a criminal purpose are not items subject to legal privilege, see Article 5
PPCE. ‘Excluded material’ means (1) personal records which a person has acquired or created in the course of
any trade, business or other occupation or for the purposes of any paid or unpaid office and which the person
holds in confidence; (2) human tissue or tissue fluid which has been taken for the purposes of diagnosis or
medical treatment and which a person holds in confidence; (3) journalistic material which a person holds in
confidence and which consists of documents, or of records other than documents, see Article 6(1) PPCE.
‘Special procedure material’ is material in the possession of a person who (1) acquired or created it in the course
of any trade, business or other occupation or for the purpose of any paid or unpaid office; and (2) holds it subject
to an express or implied undertaking to hold it in confidence or journalistic material, other than excluded
material, see Article 6(4-5) PPCE.
1727
     Article 15(1)(b) PPCE. In addition, one of the following conditions must be met: (1) it is not practicable to
communicate with any person entitled to grant entry to the premises; (2) it is practicable to communicate with a
person entitled to grant entry to the premises but it is not practicable to communicate with any person entitled to
grant access to the evidence; (3) entry to the premises will not be granted unless a warrant is produced; (4) the
purpose of a search may be frustrated or seriously prejudiced unless a police officer arriving at the premises can
secure immediate entry to them. See Article 15(3) PPCE.
1728
     Article 17(6) PPCE.
1729
     Article 18(5)-(7) PPCE.
1730
     Article 15(2) PPCE.
1731
     Article 21(2) PPCE. The same applies if the police officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the item to
be seized is evidence in relation to an offence or it is necessary to seize it in order to prevent the evidence from
being concealed, lost, tampered with or destroyed, see Article 21(3) PPCE.
1732
     Article 21(4) PPCE.

                                                        231
preventing serious crime 1733 or in the interests of the security of Jersey and the action is
proportionate to what it seeks to achieve 1734. In considering whether this is the case, the
Attorney General must take into account whether what it is thought necessary to achieve by
the authorised action could reasonably be achieved by other means 1735. An authorisation must
be in writing and ceases to have effect after three months 1736.

Specific limitations and safeguards also apply to the use of investigatory powers by public
authorities in Jersey. The use of investigatory powers to obtain information on
communications is governed by the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Bailiwick of Jersey)
Law 2003 (RIPL) 1737. The RIPL regulates notably the interception of communications, the
acquisition and disclosure of communications data (i.e., metadata stored by the service
providers), and the use of surveillance (such as covert investigations).

Article 5 RIPL introduces a general principle of confidentiality of communications by
providing that it is an offence to intercept communications in the course of their transmission
by means of a public postal service or a public or private telecommunication system without
lawful authority. Article 7 RIPL further clarifies that to be lawful, any interception of
communications must be authorised by an interception warrant 1738 issued by the Attorney
General 1739.



1733
      Pursuant to Article 101(4) PPCE, ‘serious crime’ for the purposes of such authorisation, is defined as
conduct which constitutes an offence which involves the use of violence, or results in substantial financial gain,
or is committed by a large number of persons in pursuit of a common purpose, or any other offence for which a
person over 21 with no previous convictions could reasonably be expected to be sentenced to imprisonment for
three years or more.
1734
     Article 101(2) PPCE.
1735
     Article 101(3) PPCE.
1736
     Article 102(1)-(2) PPCE. In urgent cases, authorisation may be given orally and ceases to have effect after 72
hours. An authorisation may be renewed in writing for another period of three months and must be cancelled if
the Attorney General is satisfied that the action is no longer necessary.
1737
     The RIPL is supplemented by the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Codes of Practice) (Jersey) Order
2006 (the Codes). The Codes provide guidance on the procedures that must be followed before the interception
of communications, the acquisition and disclosure of communications data or surveillance can take place under
the provisions of the RIPL. The Codes are legally binding to the extent provided by Article 52 of the RIPL.
Pursuant to Article 52(3) RIPL, they are admissible in civil and criminal proceedings. If any provision of the
Codes appears relevant to proceedings before any court or tribunal, including the Tribunal established under the
RIPL, or to the Commissioner responsible for overseeing the use of these powers (see section 2.2.3), it must be
taken into account, see Article 52(4) RIPL.
1738
     Interception without warrant is only lawful in specific limited circumstances set out exhaustively in Articles
8 and 9 RIPL, for instance if the sender and the intended recipient of the communication have consented to the
interception, if the sender or the intended recipient has consented to the interception and surveillance by means
of that interception has been authorized under Part 3 RIPL, if the interception is carried out by a provider of
postal or telecommunication services and connected to the purpose of providing that service, if it is related to the
granting of wireless telegraphy licenses or the prevention and detection of interference with wireless telegraphy,
or if it is carried out for the purpose of obtaining information about the communications of a person who is or is
reasonably believed to be in a country or territory outside of Jersey, the interception relates to the use of a
telecommunications service provided to persons in that country and the law of that country or territory requires
the provider of that service to carry out, secure or facilitate the interception in question. Any interception
conducted by public authorities under Articles 8 and 9 RIPL must be done in accordance with the Human Rights
Law 2000 (in particular Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights incorporated by that Law) and
with the Data Protection Law.
1739
     The Attorney General is independent of the Government. Pursuant to Article 2(1) of the Departments of the
Judiciary and the Legislature (Jersey) Law 1965, he/she is appointed by Her Majesty and his/her independence is
guaranteed by the provisions of that Law.

                                                       232
An interception warrant can be issued on application by certain persons specifically listed in
the law 1740 only if the Attorney General believes that it is necessary for one of the purposes
listed in Article 10(3) RIPL. These include the purpose of preventing or detecting serious
crime 1741. Importantly, the law explicitly requires that the conduct that would be authorised
must be proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by that conduct 1742. In considering the
necessity and proportionality of the measure, the Attorney General must take into account
whether any alternative means could be reasonably used to obtain the information 1743. In
addition, paragraph 2.5 of the Code of Practice on the Interception of Communications Data
further clarifies that this requires a balance of the intrusiveness of the interference against the
need for it in operational terms. The interception of communications will not be proportionate
if it is excessive in the circumstances of the case. In addition, any interception should be
carefully managed to meet the objective in question and must not be arbitrary or unfair 1744.

In accordance with Article 12 RIPL, the warrant must either name or describe one person as
the interception subject or specify a single set of premises as the premise in relation to which
the interception is to take place. The warrant must also describe the communications for
which interception is authorised, including the addresses, numbers, apparatus or other factors
used to identify the communications 1745. An interception warrant in principle ceases to have
effect after 3 months beginning with the day of the warrant's issue, unless it is renewed. A
renewal may be authorised by the Attorney General only where (s)he believes that the warrant
continues to be necessary for the purposes described in Article 10(3) RIPL 1746.

The RIPL also regulates the acquisition and disclosure of communications data. The
acquisition and disclosure of communications data is not aimed at obtaining the content of a
communication, but aimed at obtaining information such as traffic data, information about the
use of a postal service or telecommunications service, and any other information held or
obtained by a postal service/telecommunication service in relation to persons to whom the
service is provided 1747.

Persons designated with respect to a specific public authority 1748 may obtain communications
data by giving notices to a postal or telecommunications operator, requiring the operator to

1740
     Pursuant to Article 11(1) RIPL, these are the Chief Officer, the Agent of the Impôts, the Chief Immigration
Officer, the Director General of the Security Service, the Chief of the Secret Intelligence Service, the Director of
GCHQ, the Chief of Defence Intelligence of the Ministry of Defence of the Government of the United Kingdom
and a person who, for the purposes of any international mutual assistance agreement, is the competent authority
of a country or territory outside Jersey.
1741
     Article 1(1) RIPL defines ‘serious crime’ as conduct which constitutes one or more offences which involve
the use of violence, results in substantial financial gain or is conducted by a large number of persons in pursuit of
a common purpose; and for which a person who has attained the age of 21 and has no previous convictions could
reasonably be expected to be sentenced to imprisonment for 3 years or more.
1742
     Article 10(2)(b) RIPL.
1743
     Article 10(4) RIPL.
1744
     Schedule 1, paragraph 2.5, Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Codes of Practice) (Jersey) Order 2006.
1745
      Article 12(3) RIPL. Under Articles 12(4) and (5) RIPL, these specifications are not required for the
interception of communications sent or received outside Jersey where the Attorney General has issued a
certificate certifying that the examination of certain described intercepted material is necessary. In that case,
specific additional safeguards set out in Article 20 RIPL apply.
1746
     Article 13 RIPL.
1747
     ‘Communications data’ is defined in Article 24 RIPL.
1748
     In accordance with Article 29(1) RIPL and Schedule 1 to the RIPL, the designated persons are the Chief
Officer (for the Jersey Police Force), the Agent of the Impôts (for Customs and Excise), the Chief Immigration

                                                        233
obtain and/or disclose relevant data 1749. The designated person may also grant an
authorisation for persons holding relevant offices, ranks or positions in that public authority to
obtain communications data 1750. A notice or authorisation may only be issued if the
designated person believes that it is necessary to obtain communications data for one of the
specific purposes listed exhaustively in the law, including for the purpose of preventing or
detecting crime or of preventing disorder 1751.

Importantly, the notice or authorisation may only be granted if the designated person believes
that obtaining the data in question is proportionate to what is sought to be achieved 1752.
According to the Code of Practice on Accessing Communications Data, this means that even
if an action that interferes with a Convention right is directed at pursuing a legitimate aim, this
will not justify the interference if the means used to achieve the aim are excessive in the
circumstances. Any interference with a Convention right must be carefully designed to meet
the objective in question and must not be arbitrary or unfair. Even taking all these
considerations into account, in a specific case interference may still not be justified because
the impact on the individual or group is too severe 1753.

The notice must be issued in writing and specify the communications data to be obtained, the
grounds on which it is necessary to obtain the data, the office, rank or position held by the
person issuing the notice, and the manner in which any disclosure required by the notice is to
be carried out 1754. The effect of a notice is limited and unless it is renewed, it ceases to require
that data be obtained one month after the date on which the notice is given1755. A notice may
be renewed before the end of the period of one month under the same conditions as described
above 1756.

In Jersey, criminal law enforcement authorities can also obtain personal data from business
organisations in the context of investigations into whether a person has engaged in or
benefited from criminal conduct, or into the whereabouts of the proceeds of criminal conduct.
These powers are governed by the Proceeds of Crime (Jersey) Law 1999 (POCL).

In accordance with the POCL, the Bailiff can, on an application of a police officer, make
orders to produce or give access to material, issue search warrants to obtain that material

Officer (for the Immigration and Nationality Department) and the Attorney General (for the Income Tax
Department, the Social Security Department, any of the Parishes and any of the intelligence services).
1749
     Article 26(4) RIPL.
1750
     Article 26(3) RIPL.
1751
     Pursuant to Article 26(2) RIPL, the notice or authorisation can also be issued if it is in the interests of
national security, in the interests of the economic well-being of Jersey (as specified in Schedule 3, paragraph 4.2
of the Code of Practice, only to the extent relevant in the interest of national security), in the interests of public
safety, for the purpose of protecting public health, for the purpose of assessing or collecting any tax, duty, levy
or other imposition, contribution or charge payable to a government department, for the purpose, in an
emergency, of preventing death or injury or any damage to a person’s physical or mental health, or of mitigating
any injury or damage to a person’s physical or mental health, or for any other purpose which is specified by
Regulations made by the States.
1752
     Article 26(5) RIPL.
1753
     Schedule 3, paragraph 4.4 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Codes of Practice) (Jersey) Order
2006.
1754
     Article 27(1)-(2) RIPL.
1755
     Article 27(4) RIPL.
1756
     Article 27(5) RIPL. If the person who has given the notice is satisfied that it is no longer necessary on these
grounds or no longer proportionate to what is ought to be achieved, the person shall cancel the notice, pursuant
to Article 27(8) RIPL.

                                                        234
where a production order is not appropriate or not complied with, make customer information
orders and account monitoring orders.

Each type of order is subject to strict formal and substantial requirements. In essence, the
scope of such orders is always limited to one individual or one set of premises, they must
contain specific mandatory information, and they may only be issued for limited purposes.

For instance, under the POCL, the Bailiff can make an order to make material available if
there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that a specified person has engaged in or
benefited from criminal conduct, there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that the material
is likely to be of substantial value to the investigation, and does not consist of or include items
subject to legal professional privilege, and there are reasonable grounds for believing that it is
in the public interest that the material should be produced or that access to it should be
given 1757.

The Bailiff can issue a search warrant under the POCL authorising a police officer to enter
and search specific premises, provided that the same conditions as described above are met
and an order to make material available has not been complied with, or it would not be
appropriate to make such an order 1758. Where a police officer has entered premises in the
execution of a search warrant, he or she may seize and retain any material, other than items
subject to legal professional privilege, which is likely to be of value to the investigation for
the purposes of which the warrant was issued 1759.

A customer information order is an order made by the Bailiff with the consent of the Attorney
General 1760 on application by a police officer which requires a financial services business 1761
to provide any customer information 1762 that the institution has relating to a person specified
in the application for the order 1763, in such manner, and within such time as specified in the
application 1764. An account monitoring order requires the financial services business specified
in the application to provide account information specified in the order to an appropriate


1757
     Article 40 POCL. In relation to any material that consists of information contained in a computer, such an
order requires to produce the material in a form in which it can be taken away and in which it is visible and
legible, or to give access to the material in a form in which it is visible and legible, see Article 40(8) POCL.
1758
     Article 41 POCL.
1759
     Article 41(5) POCL.
1760
     Paragraphs 3 and 4, Part 1 of Schedule 3 to the POCL.
1761
     Financial services businesses are defined in Schedule 2 to the POCL and include for instance lending,
financial leasing, operating a money service business, currency exchange and cheque cashing, facilitating or
transmitting money or value through an informal money or value transfer system or network, issuing, redeeming,
managing or administering means of payment, including credit, charge and debit cards, cheques, travellers’
cheques, money orders and bankers’ drafts and electronic money, providing financial guarantees or
commitments, trading in money market instruments, foreign exchange, exchange, interest rate or index
instruments, and commodity futures, transferable securities or other negotiable instruments or financial assets,
participating in securities issues and the provision of financial services related to such issues, etc.
1762
     Customer information is defined in Paragraph 6, Part 1 of Schedule 3 to the POCL and covers information
about whether a business relationship exists or existed between a person carrying on a financial services business
and a particular person (a ‘customer’), a customer’s account number, full name, date of birth, address or former
address, the date on which a business relationship between a financial services business and a customer begins or
ends, any evidence of a customer’s identity obtained by a financial services business in pursuance of or for the
purposes of any legislation relating to money laundering, and the identity of a person sharing an account with a
customer.
1763
     Paragraph 5(b), Part 1 of Schedule 3 to the POCL.
1764
     Paragraph 1(3), Part 1 of Schedule 3 to the POCL.

                                                      235
officer, for the period 1765, in a manner, and by the time stated in the order 1766. The conditions
for issuing these orders are identical to the ones described above 1767.

Importantly, any disclosure of personal data obtained on the basis of the abovementioned
provisions has to comply with the Data Protection Law, and the further processing by criminal
law enforcement authorities of personal data obtained through such disclosures is subject to
the provisions of the Data Protection Law, as modified by Schedule 1 to the Law.

         2.2.2. Further use of the information collected

The further use of data collected by Jersey criminal law enforcement authorities on one of the
grounds referred to in Section 2.2, as well as the sharing of such data with a different
authority for purposes other than the ones for which it was originally collected (so-called
‘onward sharing’), is subject to safeguards and limitations.

First, the processing of personal data by law enforcement authorities in Jersey is governed by
the provisions of the Data Protection Law, as modified by Schedule 1 to the Law (see section
2.1. above) With respect to onward sharing, Article 13 of the Data Protection Law as
modified by Schedule 1, like the LED, allows that personal data collected for a law
enforcement purpose may be further processed (whether by the original controller or by
another controller) for any other (secondary) law enforcement purpose provided that the
controller is authorised by law to process the data for the other purpose and the processing is
necessary and proportionate to that other purpose. In this case, all the safeguards provided by
the Data Protection Law (referred to in section 2.1) apply to the processing carried out by the
receiving authority. The Law explicitly prohibits personal data collected for a law
enforcement purpose from being processed for a purpose that is not a law enforcement
purpose, unless that processing is authorised by law 1768.

When law enforcement authorities in Jersey intend to share personal data processed under the
Data Protection Law with law enforcement authorities of a third country, specific
requirements apply 1769. These requirements are very similar to those set out by the Law
Enforcement Directive. Essentially, transfers of personal data to a third country or an
international organisation are prohibited, unless the intended recipient is a law enforcement
authority 1770, the transfers are necessary for a law enforcement purpose, and they are based on

1765
     The period stated in an account monitoring order must not exceed the period of 90 days beginning with the
day on which the order is made (Paragraph 1(6), Part 2 of Schedule 3 to the POCL).
1766
     Paragraph 1(5), Part 2 of Schedule 3 to the POCL.
1767
     See Paragraph 5, Part 1 of Schedule 3 to the POCL, and Paragraph 1(1), Part 2 of Schedule 3 to the POCL.
1768
     Article 13(2) Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 13 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law.
1769
     Part 8 Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 19 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law.
1770
     Pursuant to Article 66(2)(b)(ii) in conjunction with Article 67C Data Protection Law, as modified by
paragraph 19 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law, personal data can be transferred to any other person only
subject to specific conditions and safeguards: the transfer must be strictly necessary in a specific case for the
performance of a task of the transferring controller as provided by law for any of the law enforcement purposes,
and the transferring controller has determined that there are no fundamental rights and freedoms of the data
subject concerned that override the public interest necessitating the transfer, considers that the transfer of the
personal data to a relevant authority in the third country would be ineffective or inappropriate (for example,
where the transfer could not be made in sufficient time to enable its purpose to be fulfilled), and informs the
intended recipient of the specific purpose or purposes for which the personal data may, so far as necessary, be
processed. Where personal data are transferred to a person in a third country other than a relevant authority, the
transferring controller must inform a relevant authority in that third country without undue delay of the transfer,

                                                       236
an adequacy decision adopted by the European Commission pursuant to Article 36 Law
Enforcement Directive or on appropriate safeguards 1771. In the absence of an adequacy
decision or appropriate safeguards, transfers are only possible in specific circumstances that
are listed in the law in an exhaustive manner, e.g., for the protection of vital interests of
individuals, to safeguard legitimate interests of the data subject, to prevent immediate and
serious threats to the public security of any country, and in individual cases for a law
enforcement purpose or a legal purpose, provided that there are no fundamental rights and
freedoms of the data subject overriding the public interest in the transfer 1772.

Second, the different laws that allow for data collection by law enforcement authorities in
Jersey impose specific limitations and safeguards as to the use and further dissemination of
the information obtained in exercising the powers they grant.

As regards the powers of search and seizure under the PPCE, the police officer who seizes
anything must, if requested by the occupier of premises, provide in reasonable time that
person with a record of what he has seized. The police officer must also grant access to or
supply a photograph or a copy of the seized or retained item at the request of the person who
had custody of the item before it was seized 1773. Importantly, anything that has been seized by
the police may not be retained longer than necessary in the circumstances 1774.

With respect to the interception of communications, Article 19 RIPL sets out the safeguards
that need to be applied to material intercepted on the basis of a warrant. In particular, the
Attorney General must make arrangements to ensure that the dissemination of the intercepted
material (i.e., the number of people who can access it, the extent to which the material is
disclosed or copied, the number of copies 1775, etc.) is limited to the minimum necessary for
the authorised purposes. Each copy made of any of the materials must be destroyed as soon as
there are no longer any grounds for retaining it as necessary for any of the authorised
purposes 1776. If intercepted material is shared with authorities of a country or territory outside


unless this would be ineffective or inappropriate. The transferring controller must document any transfer to a
recipient in a third country other than a relevant authority; and inform the Authority of the transfer.
1771
     Article 66 Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 19 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law. In
addition, in a case where the personal data was originally transmitted or otherwise made available to the
controller or another competent authority by a Member State of the European Union, that Member State, or any
person based in that Member State that is a competent authority for the purposes of the Law Enforcement
Directive, has authorized the transfer in accordance with the law of the Member State. Appropriate safeguards
are in place where provided by a legal instrument binding the intended recipient, or where the controller, having
assessed all the circumstances surrounding the transfer, concludes that appropriate safeguards exist to protect the
data. The controller is required to keep detailed written records of any transfer relying on appropriate safeguards,
and when relying on appropriate safeguards on the basis of the circumstances surrounding the transfer, the
controller must notify the Authority of the categories of data transferred on that basis.
1772
     Article 67B Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 19 of Schedule 1 to the Data Protection Law.
1773
     Article 23 PPCE.
1774
     Article 24 PPCE.
1775
     ‘Copy’ is defined in Article 19(7) RIPL as (1) any copy, extract or summary of the material or data which
identifies itself as the product of an interception; and (2) any record referring to an interception which is a record
of the identities of the persons to or by whom the intercepted material was sent, or to whom the communications
data relates, and “copied” shall be construed accordingly.
1776
     Pursuant to Article 19(4) RIPL, something is considered necessary for the authorised purposes if (1) it
continues to be, or is likely to become, necessary as mentioned in Article 10(3), (2) it is necessary for facilitating
the carrying out of any of the functions of the Attorney General in relation to the interception of
communications, (3) it is necessary for facilitating the carrying out of any functions of the Commissioner or of
the Tribunal in relation to the interception of communications, or (4) it is necessary to ensure that a person

                                                        237
of Jersey, the Attorney General is required to make arrangements that ensure corresponding
limitations, to the extent that the Attorney General seems fit, and that prevent any disclosure
that would not be lawful within Jersey 1777.

These safeguards are further specified in the Codes of Practice. In particular, the Code of
Practice on the Interception of Communications requires all intercepted material to be handled
in accordance with the arrangements made by the Attorney General, the details of which must
be made available to the Investigatory Powers Commissioner (see section 2.2.3 below). The
Attorney General must ensure that the safeguards are in force before any interception can
begin. The Commissioner is required to review the adequacy of the safeguards 1778. All
intercepting agencies are required to keep detailed records of interception warrants for which
they have applied 1779. The Code further requires intercepted material, as well as copies and
summaries of the material, to be handled and stored securely to minimise the risk of loss or
theft. In particular, it must be inaccessible to persons without the required level of security
clearance, and this requirement for secure storage also applies to communications service
providers. It also requires intercepted material to be securely destroyed as soon as it is no
longer needed for any of the authorised purposes and retained material to be reviewed at
appropriate intervals to confirm that its retention is justified and valid 1780.

Concerning the acquisition and disclosure of Communications Data, the Code of Practice on
Accessing Communications Data provides that applications and notices for communications
data must be retained by the relevant public authority until they have been audited by the
Investigatory Powers Commissioner. The public authority should also keep a record of the
dates on which an authorisation or notice is started and cancelled. The Code furthermore
provides that communications data, as well as all copies, extracts and summaries of it, must
be handled and stored securely 1781.

        2.2.3. Oversight

Different bodies carry out oversight of the activities of criminal law enforcement authorities.

First, the processing of personal data by competent authorities for criminal law enforcement
purposes is subject to the oversight of the JOIC, whose independence is enshrined in law1782.
The tasks and powers of the JOIC mirror those set out in Article 46 and 47 of the LED 1783. To
perform those tasks, the JOIC may investigate complaints, conduct inquiries into the
processing of personal data by criminal law enforcement authorities 1784, issue
recommendations, make a determination of a violation of the Law and impose sanctions 1785.
These sanctions can include reprimands, warnings or corrective orders (e.g., requiring the

conducting a criminal prosecution has the information needed to determine what is required of that person by his
or her duty to secure the fairness of the prosecution.
1777
     Article 19(6)(b) RIPL.
1778
     Schedule 1, paragraph 6.1-6.3, Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Codes of Practice) (Jersey) Order 2006.
1779
     Schedule 1, paragraph 5.15, Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Codes of Practice) (Jersey) Order 2006.
1780
     Schedule 1, paragraph 6.4 to 6.9, Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Codes of Practice) (Jersey) Order
2006.
1781
     Schedule 3, paragraph 7, Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Codes of Practice) (Jersey) Order 2006.
1782
     Article 12 Data Protection Authority Law.
1783
     Article 11 Data Protection Authority Law.
1784
     Article 21 Data Protection Authority Law.
1785
     Article 24 Data Protection Authority Law.

                                                     238
authority to bring processing in compliance with the Law, rectify or erase data, cease the
processing, etc.) 1786. In addition, the JOIC may issue a public statement concerning data
breaches, violations of the Data Protection Law or imposed corrective orders/sanctions, where
it considers that it would be in the public interest to do so given the gravity of the matter or
other exceptional circumstances 1787. In determining which order to impose, the JOIC must
have regard to different factors, such as the nature, gravity and duration of the violation,
whether the violation was intentional or negligent, the degree of cooperation with the JOIC to
remedy the breach, any other action taken to mitigate any damage suffered by data subjects
etc. 1788. Since the entry into force of the Data Protection Law, the JOIC has engaged with law
enforcement authorities by providing guidance and advice on the application of the Data
Protection Law 1789. The JOIC and SOJP have also worked together on joint initiatives such as
a Fraud Prevention Forum and CCTV awareness.

Second, the activities of the Attorney General under the PPCE, i.e., the authorisation of
interference with property or wireless telegraphy pursuant to Article 101 PPCE, are subject to
the oversight of a commissioner appointed by the Bailiff among one of the ordinary judges of
the Court of Appeal 1790. The role of the Commissioner is to keep under review the carrying
out by the Attorney General of his functions. To that end, the Attorney General is required to
notify the Commissioner of any authorisations given, renewed or cancelled at least every 12
months 1791. The Commissioner has a duty to make a report to the Bailiff on the carrying out
of the Attorney General’s functions under the PPCE as soon as practicable after the end of
each year. The Bailiff in turn is required to submit a copy of that report to the States 1792.

Third, the use of investigatory powers under the RIPL is overseen by the Investigatory Powers
Commissioner. Under Part IV of the RIPL, the Bailiff must appoint a judge of the Court of
Appeal (of Jersey) as the Investigatory Powers Commissioner. The Commissioner is
responsible for reviewing the activities under the RIPL, including the issuing of interception
warrants, and the issuing of authorisations and notices for the collection and disclosure of
communications data 1793. All persons involved in the use of investigatory powers are required
to disclose or provide to the Commissioner all documents and information that the
Commissioner may require for the purpose of enabling him to carry out his functions 1794. The
Commissioner is in turn required to prepare an annual report on the use of investigatory
powers for submission to the Bailiff of Jersey 1795. The Bailiff must lay before States a copy of
every annual report made by the Commissioner 1796. The Commissioner’s report is also made

1786
     Article 25 Data Protection Authority Law. The JOIC cannot impose administrative fines on competent
authorities processing personal data for criminal law enforcement purposes, see Article 26(9) Data Protection
Authority Law.
1787
     Article 14 Data Protection Authority Law.
1788
     Article 26(2) Data Protection Authority Law.
1789
     There have been complaints relating to the handling of data subject access requests and compliance with data
protection principles against the States of Jersey Police and Honorary Police. The States of Jersey Police has also
reported data breaches to the JOIC. These matters have been investigated by the JOIC but have not been found to
require regulatory sanctions.
1790
     Article 104 PPCE.
1791
     Article 103 PPCE.
1792
     Article 104(3) and (4) PPCE.
1793
     Article 43 RIPL.
1794
     Article 44 RIPL.
1795
     Article 44(4) RIPL.
1796
     Article 44(6) RIPL.

                                                       239
public. If it appears to the Commissioner that there has been a contravention of the RIPL or
insufficient safeguards have been put in place for intercepted communications, he/she must
report that to the Bailiff 1797.

As described in the Commissioner’s recent annual reports, the overwhelming majority of
warrants requested and granted in Jersey are in support of law enforcement activities, notably
for the purpose of detecting and preventing large-scale commercial drug trafficking and
associated money laundering. In his annual reports, the Commissioner found that warrants
had been issued for properly identified statutory purposes, in respect of the principles of
necessity and proportionality and in compliance with procedural requirements. He also noted
that the safeguards required by Article 19 RIPL had been implemented in a satisfactory
manner 1798.

        2.2.4. Redress

As regards the processing of personal data by law enforcement authorities in Jersey, redress
mechanisms are available under the data protection legislation, under the Human Rights Law
2000 and under the RIPL. This series of mechanisms provide data subjects with effective
administrative and judicial means of redress, enabling them in particular to ensure their rights,
including the right to have access to their personal data, or to obtain the rectification or
erasure of such data.

First, data subjects have the right to lodge a complaint with the JOIC concerning the
processing of their personal data by criminal law enforcement authorities 1799. The JOIC has
the power to determine breaches of the Data Protection Law and impose necessary sanctions.
It also has the power, on request by a data subject or on its own initiative, to bring
proceedings before a court in respect of any breach or anticipated breach of the Law.
Following such complaint, the court can make any order, relief and remedy it considers just
under the circumstances, including an award of compensation to any person who suffers
damage as a result of the breach, an injunction or interim injunction to restrain any actual or
anticipated breach of an operative provision, and a declaration that a breach was
committed 1800.

Second, individuals can obtain judicial redress against decisions of the JOIC. This includes
the possibility to challenge an action or inaction of the JOIC before a court, e.g., decisions not
to investigate a complaint, or decisions finding that there has been no violation of the Law.


1797
     Article 44(2) and (3) RIPL.
1798
     Recent reports of the Investigatory Powers Commissioner are available at:
https://statesassembly.gov.je/assemblyreports/2022/r.98-2022.pdf,
https://statesassembly.gov.je/assemblyreports/2022/r.4-2022.pdf,
https://statesassembly.gov.je/assemblyreports/2019/r.112-2019.pdf. In 2021, the Commissioner noted that in two
cases the Attorney General had declined to authorise an interception warrant because the ‘serious crime’
threshold had not been satisfied. The Commissioner considered these instances as indicative for the care with
which the Attorney General performed his statutory functions. In 2018, the Commissioner identified some areas
in the applications for interception warrants in which further detail could have been beneficial, and others in
which quality could be improved. In addition, the Commissioner noted a limited number of exceptional cases in
which ‘human error’ had led to data being acquired from a wrong telephone number. He explained that to
prevent such errors from happening in the future, additional procedural safeguards has been put in place.
1799
     Article 19 Data Protection Authority Law.
1800
     Article 30 Data Protection Authority Law.

                                                     240
Moreover, an individual can appeal to the court against any failure of the JOIC to provide
written notice that a complaint is either being investigated or not being investigated, within
the time period specified in the Law, or if the complaint is being investigated, written notice
of the progress and, where applicable, the outcome of the investigation within the time period
specified in the Law. If a determination of the Authority is appealed, the court has the power
to confirm or annul the determination of the JOIC and remit the matter back to the JOIC for
reconsideration and make any other order it considers just 1801.

Third, under Articles 68 and 69 of the Data Protection Law, individuals can also obtain
judicial redress against criminal law enforcement authorities directly before the courts. In
particular, if there is a breach of the operative provisions of the Law and the breach causes
damage to another person, it is actionable in court by that person 1802.

Fourth, as far as any person considers that their rights, including rights to privacy and data
protection, have been violated by public authorities, individuals can obtain redress before the
Jersey courts under the Human Rights Law 2000. Under Article 7(1) of the Human Rights
Law, it is unlawful for a public authority to act in a way which is incompatible with rights
provided in the law 1803. A person who claims that a public authority has acted (or proposes to
act) in a way which is unlawful under Article 7(1) can bring proceedings against the authority
under this Law in the appropriate court or tribunal, when he or she is (or would be) a victim of
the unlawful act 1804. If the court finds any act of a public authority to be unlawful, it can grant
such relief or remedy, or make such order, within its powers as it considers just and
appropriate 1805.

Finally, any individual may obtain judicial redress before the European Court of Human
Rights against the unlawful collection of his/her data by criminal law enforcement authorities,
provided that all available domestic remedies have been exhausted.

For violations of the RIPL or the PPCE, individuals can also obtain redress before the
Interception of Communications Tribunal. This redress avenue is described in section 2.3.4
below.

       2.3. Access and use by Jersey public authorities for national security purposes




1801
     Articles 31 and 32 Data Protection Authority Law.
1802
      For instance, in Alwitry-v-The States Employment Board and Minister for H&SS 25-Feb-2016
(jerseylaw.je), a data subject challenged the content of disclosures made in response to a data subject access
request.
1803
     However, the act of the public authority is not unlawful if as the result of one or more provisions of primary
legislation, the authority could not have acted differently or in the case of one or more provisions of, or made
under, primary legislation which cannot be read or given effect in a way which is compatible with the
Convention rights, the authority was acting so as to give effect to or enforce those provisions, see Article 7(6) of
the Human Rights Law.
1804
     Article 8(1) Human Rights Law. According to Article 8(5) Human Rights Law a person is a victim of an
unlawful act only if he would be a victim for the purposes of Article 34 of the Convention if proceedings were
brought in the European Court of Human Rights in respect of that act.
1805
     Article 9(1) Human Rights Law.

                                                       241
In Jersey, access to information transferred under the adequacy decision for purposes of
national security can take place in the form of the interception of communications and the
acquisition and disclosure of communications data on the basis of the RIPL 1806.

         2.3.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

The interception of communications and acquisition and disclosure of communications data
may not only take place in the context of criminal investigations, but also when necessary in
the interests of national security or to safeguard the economic well-being of the Bailiwick1807.
The use of these powers for those purposes is subject to the same substantive and procedural
limitations and safeguards as described in section 2.2.1 in the context of criminal law
enforcement, notably the need for independent authorisation, requirements of necessity and
proportionality and limitation to specific communications or information 1808.

Moreover, although the notion of “economic well-being” may appear broad, Article 10 RIPL
sets out that an interception warrant can only be considered necessary for the purpose of
safeguarding the economic well-being of Jersey if the purpose is to obtain information
relating to the acts or intentions of persons outside Jersey 1809. In addition, the Code of Practice
on the Interception of Communications further specifies that the Attorney General can only
issue an interception warrant for the purpose of safeguarding the economic well-being of
Jersey if he considers, on the basis of the facts of each case, that there is a direct link between
the economic well-being of the Bailiwick and national security 1810. Similarly, the Code of
Practice on Accessing Communications Data sets out that communications data can only be
obtained for the purpose of the economic well-being of Jersey if, on the basis of the facts of
each case, the economic well-being is directly related to national security 1811.

         2.3.2. Further use of the information collected

The further use of personal data obtained in the interests of national security is governed by
the provisions the Data Protection Law, as described in section 2.1 1812. Pursuant to Article


1806
     The safeguards under the RIPL apply to any Jersey or UK public authorities making use of powers under the
RIPL, notably the requirements for the issuing and implementation of interception warrants, restrictions on the
use and disclosure of intercepted material, and the right of complaint to the Tribunal. The Human Rights Law
and the Data Protection Law also apply. Where UK intelligence services process information collected in Jersey
there are also limitations and safeguards provided by UK law, see the Commission Implementing Decision of
28.6.2021 pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2016/679 on the adequate protection of personal data by the United
Kingdom,                  available                at:            https://commission.europa.eu/system/files/2021-
06/decision_on_the_adequate_protection_of_personal_data_by_the_united_kingdom_-
_general_data_protection_regulation_en.pdf.
1807
     Articles 10(3)(a) and (c) and 26(2)(a) and (c) RIPL.
1808
     Differently from what is described in Section 2.2.1, when relating to the interception of communications in
the interest of national security or the safeguarding of Jersey’s economic well-being, a warrant can be renewed
for up to six months, see Article 13(3)(a) RIPL.
1809
     Article 10(5) RIPL.
1810
     Schedule 1, paragraph 4.4, Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Codes of Practice) (Jersey) Order 2006. An
example of a situation where it might be possible to rely on this ground to authorise an interception would be a
threat to Jersey’s critical national infrastructure that would impact Jersey’s economic interests (e.g., through an
attack on Jersey’s essential communications infrastructure).
1811
     Schedule 3, paragraph 4.4 Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Codes of Practice) (Jersey) Order 2006.
1812
     The Data Protection Law applies to the processing of personal data by a competent authority, including for
the purpose of safeguarding against or preventing threats to national security. While the Data Protection Law
provides for an exemption from specified provisions for national security purposes, these provisions may only be

                                                       242
8(1)(a) and (b) of the Data Protection Law, data processing must be lawful, and data must not
be further processed in a manner that is incompatible with the purpose for which it was
collected 1813.

Moreover, specific requirements apply when personal data is shared with authorities outside
of Jersey 1814. As described in more detail in sections 1.1 and 2.1, these requirements are very
similar to those set out by the EU’s data protection framework. Transfers of personal data to a
third country or an international organisation are prohibited, unless they are based on an
adequacy decision adopted by the European Commission pursuant to either Article 45 GDPR
or Article 36 of the Law Enforcement Directive, or on appropriate safeguards 1815. In the
absence of an adequacy decision or appropriate safeguards, transfers are only possible in
specific circumstances that are listed in the law in an exhaustive manner 1816.

In addition, the RIPL, complemented by the relevant Codes of Practice, sets out specific
safeguards for the further use and sharing of data obtained on the basis of its provisions.
These involve particular arrangements to ensure that the dissemination of material obtained is
limited to the minimum necessary for the purposes pursued with the authorisation. Material
must be handled and stored securely to minimise the risk of loss or theft and must be
destroyed as soon as there are no longer any grounds for retaining it as necessary for any of
the authorised purposes. Retained material must be reviewed at appropriate intervals to
confirm that its retention is justified and valid. All agencies exercising powers on the basis of
the RIPL are required to keep detailed records of warrants or authorisations for which they
have applied 1817. Intercepted material may be shared with authorities of a country or territory
outside of Jersey only if arrangements are in place to ensure corresponding limitations and to
prevent any disclosure that would not be lawful within Jersey 1818.

         2.3.3. Oversight

Government access for national security purposes in Jersey is overseen by different bodies.
The Data Protection Authority oversees the processing of personal data in light of the Data
Protection Law, while specific oversight on the use of the investigatory powers under the
RIPL is provided by the Investigatory Powers Commissioner.




restricted if necessary and proportionate and to the extent that their application would be likely to prejudice
national security.
1813
     Pursuant to Article 13(2) Data Protection Law, the controller must assess whether that processing is
compatible with the purposes for which the personal data were collected by taking into account factors that
include any link between the purposes for which the data have been collected and the purposes of the intended
further processing, the context in which the data have been collected, in particular regarding the relationship
between data subjects and the controller, the nature of the data, in particular whether it is special category data,
the possible consequences of the intended further processing for data subjects, and the existence of appropriate
safeguards.
1814
     Part 8 Data Protection Law, as modified by paragraph 19 of Schedule 1 to that Law where the processing is
by a competent authority for a law enforcement purpose.
1815
     Article 66 Data Protection Law.
1816
     Article 66(2)I Data Protection Law in conjunction with Schedule 3 to the Data Protection Law.
1817
     Article 19 RIPL, Schedule 1, paragraphs 5.15, 6.1-6.3 and 6.4-6.9 Regulation of Investigatory Powers
(Codes of Practice) (Jersey) Order 2006; Schedule 3, paragraph 7, Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Codes of
Practice) (Jersey) Order 2006.
1818
     Article 19(6)(b) RIPL, see also section 2.2.2 above.

                                                       243
The processing of personal data carried out for national security purposes is governed either
by the provisions of the Data Protection Law. The general functions and powers of the JOIC
are laid down in Article 11 et seq. of the Data Protection Authority Law. The tasks include,
but are not limited to, monitoring and enforcement, promoting public awareness, advising the
Jersey parliament and government and other institutions on legislative and administrative
measures, promote the awareness of controllers and processors of their obligations, provide
information to a data subject concerning the exercise of the data subject’s rights, handle
complaints, conduct investigations, issue guidance etc. The JOIC has the powers to notify
controllers of an alleged infringement and to issue warnings that a processing is likely to
infringe the rules, issue reprimands, ban processing or order the controller to take certain
actions 1819. While the Data Protection Law 1820 allows exemptions from certain provisions,
including from those that concern the JOIC, for national security purposes, these provisions
may only be restricted on a case-by-case basis to the extent that their application would be
likely to prejudice national security and if necessary and proportionate (as explained in
section 2.1).

Furthermore, as described in section 2.2.3 above in the context of criminal law enforcement,
the Investigatory Powers Commissioner oversees the application of the RIPL i.e., the
interception of communications and the acquisition and disclosure of communications data. In
his recent annual reports, the Commissioner noted that the overwhelming majority of warrants
in Jersey were requested and granted in a law enforcement context, in particular for the
purposes of detection and prevention of drug trafficking and associated money laundering 1821.

         2.3.4. Redress

Individuals can obtain redress for violations of the RIPL or the PPCE before the independent
Investigatory Powers Tribunal established by Article 46 RIPL 1822.

The Tribunal is the appropriate forum for any complaint by a person, including any individual
in the EU, who believes 1823 that conduct under the RIPL or under the PPCE 1824 has taken


1819
     Part 4 Data Protection Authority Law.
1820
     Pursuant to Article 41 Data Protection Law, the processing of personal data necessary for the purpose of
safeguarding national security can be exempt from certain parts of the Data Protection Authority Law, provided
that the applicable conditions are fulfilled.
1821
     Recent reports of the Investigatory Powers Commissioner are available at:
https://statesassembly.gov.je/assemblyreports/2022/r.98-2022.pdf,
https://statesassembly.gov.je/assemblyreports/2022/r.4-2022.pdf,
https://statesassembly.gov.je/assemblyreports/2019/r.112-2019.pdf.
1822
     In accordance with Article 46(1) RIPL, the Tribunal consists of three members appointed by the by the
Superior Number of the Royal Court of Jersey, of whom one shall be an ordinary judge of the Court of Appeal,
who shall be the president of the Tribunal, and two shall be Jurats. Pursuant to Schedule 3 to the RIPL, the
members are appointed for a term of 5 years and can be reappointed. A member of the Tribunal may be removed
from office by the Royal Court at the member’s own request.
1823
     On the standard of the ‘belief’ test, in the absence of relevant case law in Jersey, UK case law is likely to be
persuasive. In Human Rights Watch v Secretary of State [2016] UKIPTrib15_165-CH, paragraph 41, the
Investigatory Powers Tribunal, by referring to the European Court of Human Rights case law, held that the
appropriate test is whether in respect of the asserted belief that any conduct falling within Subsection 68(5) of
RIPA 2000 has been carried out by or on behalf of any of the intelligence services, there is any basis for such
belief, such that the individual may claim to be a victim of a violation occasioned by the mere existence of secret
measures or legislation permitting secret measures, only if he is able to show that due to his personal situation,
he is potentially at risk of being subjected to such measures.

                                                        244
place in relation to him, his property or his communications or in relation to that person’s use
of any postal service, telecommunications service or telecommunication system 1825. In
addition, the complainant is required to believe that the conduct has taken place either in
“challengeable circumstances” 1826 or has been carried out by or on behalf of the intelligence
services 1827.

When considering a complaint, it is the duty of the Tribunal to investigate whether
surveillance has taken place in relation to the complainant, as well as the authority for such
surveillance, if any 1828. The Tribunal determines whether any errors of law, errors of fact or
procedural errors have been committed, or whether there has been any other irregularity, such
as a lack of proportionality 1829. All persons involved in the exercise of powers under the RIPL
are required to provide to the Tribunal all such documents and information that the Tribunal
may need to carry out its functions 1830. The Tribunal also has the power to require the
Investigatory Powers Commissioner to provide the Tribunal with all such assistance
(including the Commissioner's opinion as to any issue to be determined by the Tribunal) as
the Tribunal think fit 1831. The Commissioner must be kept informed about the proceedings
and any determination, award, order, or other decision made in relation to those
proceedings 1832.

If the Tribunal makes a determination in favour of the complainant, the Tribunal must provide
the complainant with a summary of that determination including any findings of fact. The
tribunal must also give notice to the complainant if no determination has been made in his/her
favour 1833. The Tribunal has the power to issue interim orders and to provide any such award
of compensation or other order as it thinks fit. This may include an order quashing or
cancelling any warrant or authorisation and an order requiring the destruction of any records
of information obtained in exercise of any power conferred by a warrant or authorisation, or
otherwise held by any public authority in relation to any person 1834.

Further, an individual who believes that his or her rights under the Data Protection Law have
been (or are about to be) breached can make a complaint to the JOIC, (as described in section
2.3.3 above). Redress mechanisms under the Data Protection Law include breach
1824
     Pursuant to Article 46(6) RIPL, conduct is subject to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal if it is carried out by or
on behalf of any of the intelligence services, if it is in connection with the interception of communications in the
course of their transmission by means of a postal service or telecommunication system, if it is conduct to which
the rules on the acquisition and disclosure of communications data apply, conduct to which the rules on
surveillance covert human intelligence sources apply, or if it is any entry on or interference with property or any
interference with wireless telegraphy.
1825
     Article 46(5)(a) RIPL.
1826
     Pursuant to Article 46(8) RIPL, conduct has taken place in ‘challengeable circumstances’ if it has taken place
with authority (e.g., on the basis of an interception warrant or an authorisation/notice for the acquisition and
disclosure of communications data), or if the circumstances are such that it would not have been appropriate for
the conduct to take place without authority, or at least without proper consideration having been given to
whether such authority should be sought. Conduct does not take place in challengeable circumstances to the
extent that it is authorized by, or takes place with the permission of, the Bailiff.
1827
     Article 46(5)(b) RIPL.
1828
     Article 48(3)(a) and (b) RIPL.
1829
     Article 48(3)(c) RIPL.
1830
     Article 49(6) and (7) RIPL.
1831
     Article 49(2) RIPL.
1832
     Article 49(3) RIPL.
1833
     Article 49(5) RIPL.
1834
     Article 48(7) RIPL.

                                                        245
determinations or sanctions issued by the JOIC, and civil proceedings before a court, in which
a court can make any order, relief and remedy it considers just under the circumstances,
including an award of compensation to any person who suffers damage as a result of the
breach, an injunction or interim injunction to restrain any actual or anticipated breach of an
operative provision, and a declaration that a breach was committed (as described in section
2.2.4 above).

Finally, as also described in section 2.2.4 above, as far as individuals consider that their
rights, including rights to privacy and data protection, have been violated by public
authorities, they can obtain redress before the Jersey courts under the Human Rights Law
2000. In addition, any individual may obtain judicial redress before the European Court of
Human Rights against the unlawful collection of his/her data for national security purposes,
provided that all available domestic remedies have been exhausted.




                                             246
                                            IX. NEW ZEALAND

1. RULES APPLYING TO THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA

    1.1. Relevant developments in the data protection framework of New Zealand

The adequacy decision for New Zealand was adopted on 19 December 2012 1835, following the
opinion of the Article 29 Working Party of 4 April 2011 1836. At the time of the adoption of the
decision, the protection of personal data in New Zealand was mainly governed by the Privacy
Act of 17 May 1993 1837. Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, the Privacy Act 1993
was amended several times: by the Privacy Amendment Act 2013, the Harmful Digital
Communications Act 2015, the Intelligence and Security Act 2017 and the Enhancing Identity
Verification and Border Processes Legislation Act 2017. Moreover, a comprehensive reform
of the Privacy Act 1993 was launched in 2018 and concluded in 2020 with the adoption of the
Privacy Act 2020, which entered into force in December 2020. In addition, further
interpretations and clarifications have been provided by the courts and the data protection
authority (the Office of the Privacy Commissioner, OPC).

Like its predecessor, the Privacy Act 2020 has a broad scope of application, applying to
“agencies” 1838, i.e., private operators 1839 and the public sector 1840, regardless of where they


1835
      Commission Implementing Decision 2013/65/EU of 19 December 2012 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council on the adequate protection of personal data by New Zealand, OJ L
28, 30.1.2013, p. 12.
1836
       Opinion No 11/2011 on the level of protection of personal data in New Zealand, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/2011/wp182_en.pdf.
1837
      In addition, the OPC has the power to adopt legally binding Codes of Practice providing for specific data
protection rules (that may amend corresponding provisions of the Privacy Act 2020) for certain sectors (Section
32 Privacy Act 2020). There are currently six codes of practice: the Civil Defence National Emergencies
(Information Sharing) Code (which applies in relation to emergencies for which a state of national emergency is
in force, e.g., a natural disaster or epidemic); the Credit Reporting Privacy Code (which applies to credit
reporters); the Health Information Privacy Code (which applies to agencies providing health or disability
services, institutions providing training of health professionals, health insurance agencies, etc. and, inter alia,
provides for enhanced transparency requirements and specific grounds for data processing); the Justice Sector
Unique Identifier Code; the Superannuation Schemes Unique Identifier Code and the Telecommunications
Information Privacy Code (which applies to subscriber information, traffic information and telecommunications
content held by telecommunications agencies). The Codes were amended several times to reflect corresponding
changes introduced in the Privacy Act, most recently on the occasion of the 2020 reform.
1838
      Section 4, in conjunction with Section 7(1), 8 and 9 Privacy Act 2020. The Act does not apply to ‘news
entities’, to the extent they carry out news activities (the gathering, preparing or compiling of any (observations
on) news or current affairs for the purpose of publication, as well as the publication itself, Section 7(1) Privacy
Act 2020). Case law has clarified that this is to be understood as “news activity which is conducted responsibly”,
i.e., ethically and in a manner consistent with the public interest in fair and accurate reporting. In particular, the
exemption cannot be used to “shield a news medium from the Privacy Act where the agency fails to meet the
standards of responsible news activity, including impartiality, accuracy and balance” (Director of Human Rights
Proceedings v Slater [2019] NZHRRT 13, at 62.8, 80 and 92.5). The recent reform further limited this exception,
by specifying that only news entities that are subject to oversight by a recognised independent body (e.g., the
Broadcasting Standards Authority, BSA or New Zealand Media Council, NZMC) are able to rely on it (Section
7(1) Privacy Act 2020). When the exception applies, the balance between privacy and freedom of expression is
ensured through other standards developed by these oversight bodies on fairness, ethical journalism, privacy and
complaint handling, e.g., Standard 7 of the BSA and the Principles of the NZMC.
1839
     The Act does not apply to individuals that handle personal information solely for domestic affairs unless the
processing is highly offensive to a reasonable person (Section 27 Privacy Act 2020). The OPC has explained
that, to determine whether this is the case, different factors should be taken into account, such as the sensitivity
of the information, the harm to the individual, whether the information was in the public domain, etc.
(https://privacy.org.nz/further-resources/knowledge-base/view/232).

                                                        247
collect or hold personal information, and regardless of where the concerned individuals are
located 1841. While the definition of personal information in the Privacy Act 2020 itself (i.e.,
information about an identifiable individual 1842) has not changed, decisions of the OPC have
confirmed its broad interpretation, e.g., by clarifying that information will be considered
personal information as long as “any person can link the information with other information
to identify the individual or individuals to which it relates” 1843. The territorial scope of the
New Zealand data protection rules have been extended by the Privacy Act 2020, which also
applies to overseas agencies that carry on business in New Zealand (which is understood
broadly and does not necessarily imply a commercial operation, having a place of business in
New Zealand, receiving any monetary payment for the supply of goods or services or
intending to make a profit from the business in New Zealand) 1844.

The main data protection principles provided under the New Zealand data protection
framework at the time of the adoption of the adequacy decision, which are mainly reflected in
the Privacy Act’s Information Privacy Principles (IPP), have remained in place. This is the
case for the principles of lawfulness 1845, purpose limitation (IPP 1, 10 and 11), data
minimisation (IPP 1) 1846, data accuracy (IPP 7(2) and 8), data retention (IPP 9), data security
(IPP 5) and accountability 1847. At the same time, several aspects of the legal framework have
been further clarified and developed, either through legislative amendments or case law
and/or guidance and decisions of the OPC.

In particular, several aspects of the requirements for lawfulness of processing have been
strengthened. Whereas agencies were already only allowed to collect personal information for
a lawful purpose connected with their function or activity 1848, the Privacy Act 2020 has
further clarified that, even if there is such a purpose, but pursuing it does not require the
collection of an individual’s identifying information, the agency may not require such
information 1849. The Act also requires agencies to specifically take into account the situation



1840
     A few public authorities are excluded from the scope of application, such as the Sovereign, the House of
Representatives, the Governor-General, courts in relation to their judicial functions and Ombudsmen (Section
8(b) Privacy Act 2020). The processing of personal information by those authorities is subject to other rules,
such as the Parliamentary Practice in New Zealand (p. 86, 507 and 750; the Standing Orders for private and
secret evidence; and Senior Courts (Access to Court Documents) Rules 2017. In addition, as explained in more
detail in section 2.1, the processing of personal data by intelligence agencies is subject to (limited) exceptions.
1841
     Section 4(1)(a) and (2) Privacy Act 2020.
1842
     Section 7(1) Privacy Act 2020.
1843
     AO 1/2016 [2017] NZPrivCmr 1, at 11.
1844
     Section 4(1)(b) and (3) Privacy Act 2020. Factors the OPC considers to qualify as “carrying on business in
New Zealand” include repetitive, systematic or continuing use of personal information in New Zealand, websites
targeted at New Zealanders, the holding of trademarks and registered web domains in New Zealand, etc. (see
e.g., the information provided under the decision tree at https://www.privacy.org.nz/responsibilities/your-
obligations/disclosing-personal-information-outside-new-zealand/decision-tree-page/).
1845
     See IPP 1, 2 and 4 (collection of personal information), IPP 10 (use) and IPP 11 (disclosure).
1846
     See for example Case Note 87513 [2006] NZPrivCmr 11 and Case Note 229558 [2012] NZPrivCmr 1.
1847
     Section 201 of the Privacy Act 2020.
1848
      In particular, personal information may not be collected in contravention of the law (e.g., collection in
violation of another statute, collection to carry out a criminal activity etc.) or if not relevant to and closely linked
with an agency’s activities or functions. Where personal information is received by a New Zealand agency on
the basis of the adequacy decision, the purpose of collection will in principle be the purpose for which the
information is transferred.
1849
     IPP 1 (2).

                                                         248
of children or young people when collecting personal information, to ensure that the way in
which the information is collected is fair in the circumstances 1850.

In addition, since the adoption of the adequacy decision, certain legal bases for the use or
disclosure of personal information have been further circumscribed 1851. First, the possibility to
use or disclose personal information whose source is publicly available has been limited
through an amendment introduced by the Harmful Digital Communications Act 2015 that
clarified that this ground cannot be relied upon if, in the circumstances of the case, it would be
unfair or unreasonable to use/disclose the information 1852. The OPC has clarified that different
factors should be taken into account in this context, including how old the information is, how
it was made public, the sensitivity of the information, the seriousness of the possible impact of
it and the steps that have been taken by an agency to verify the information 1853. Second, the
Privacy Amendment Act 2013 clarified in which situations personal information may be used
or disclosed to prevent or lessen a serious threat to public health or public safety, or the life or
health of an individual 1854. In particular, to determine whether there is a serious threat, regard
has to be given to the likelihood of the threat being realised; the severity of the consequences
if the threat is realised and the time at which the threat may be realised 1855.

With respect to public authorities, the Privacy Amendment Act 2013 introduced the
possibility for the government to approve so-called information sharing agreements
(AISAs) 1856, which allow different bodies or different parts/departments within one authority
to share personal information to facilitate the provision of public services 1857. AISAs are
adopted after consulting the OPC, as well as any person or organisation representing the
interests of the (classes of) individuals whose information would be shared 1858. AISAs may
provide for modifications to the IPPs, e.g., by establishing specific grounds to collect, use or
disclose personal information and must specify the categories of information that may be
shared, as well as the purposes for which and circumstances in which this may take place1859.
There are currently 13 approved AISAs, including between Inland Revenue and the
Department of Internal Affairs, between the Ministry of Social Development and the New
Zealand Customs Service, as well as an AISA for improving public services to vulnerable

1850
     IPP 4 (b).
1851
     The Privacy Act 2020 allows the use and disclosure of personal information for a different purpose than for
which it was collected in a limited number of situations, e.g., if the purpose of use/disclosure is directly related to
the purpose for which the information was collected; the use/disclosure is authorised by the individual; the
use/disclosure is necessary for the conduct of proceedings before a court or tribunal, etc. (IPP 10 and 11).
1852
     IPP 10(1)(d) and 11(1)(d).
1853
     Available at: https://privacy.org.nz/tools/knowledge-base/view/250?t=169619_237542.
1854
     IPP 10(1)(f) and 11(1)(f).
1855
      See the definition of serious threat in Section 7(1) Privacy Act 2020. The notion has also been further
clarified in case law. For example, in R v R [2015] NZHC 713 at [71]-[73], the High Court found that the
threshold was not reached, as the disclosure was made based on suspicion and there was not sufficient evidence
to meet the test that the release of the information was necessary to prevent or lessen a serious threat. In another
case, the OPC found that the threshold had been met in relation to a disclosure by the Police to an emergency
mental health team about a woman who told Police that she was suicidal (Case Note 279251 [2017] NZPrivCmr
4). See also Te Pou Matakana Limited v Attorney-General (No 1) [2021] NZHC 2942 (WOCA 1) and Te Pou
Matakana Limited v Attorney-General (No 2) [2021] NZHC 3319 (WOCA 2).
1856
     Section 145-146 Privacy Act 2020.
1857
     Section 136, in conjunction with Section 139 and 140 Privacy Act 2020. While private operators may also
become party to an AISA, at least one of the agencies must be a public authority (Section 141 Privacy Act 2020).
1858
     Section 150 Privacy Act 2020.
1859
     Section 144 and 145(2) Privacy Act 2020.

                                                         249
children 1860. Before recommending an AISA, a Minister must inter alia be satisfied that it will
facilitate the provision of a public service, the type and quantity of personal information to be
shared is no more than necessary to facilitate the provision of the public service and the AISA
contains adequate safeguards to protect the privacy of concerned individuals 1861. The handling
of personal information under AISAs remains subject to the oversight of the OPC 1862.

As regards transparency, the Privacy Act 2020 generally requires agencies to provide certain
information, including about their contact details, the purpose of collection and intended
recipients (IPP 3), when they collect information directly from the individual. To further
strengthen the level of transparency, the New Zealand government introduced in September
2023 a bill in the Parliament to amend the Privacy Act 2020 to extend these proactive
notification requirements to also apply to situations where information is collected indirectly
(i.e., where it is obtained from other entities and further used/disclosed) 1863.

Another area of the New Zealand data protection regime that has evolved since the adoption
of the adequacy decision concerns the requirements with respect to security. Although until
recently, New Zealand agencies would voluntarily report data breaches to the OPC, the
Privacy Act 2020 introduced an obligation to notify both the OPC and concerned
individuals 1864 as soon as practicable after becoming aware of notifiable privacy breaches
(i.e., a privacy breach that it is reasonable to believe has caused serious harm to an affected
individual or individuals or is likely to do so)1865. To assess whether a privacy breach has or is
likely to cause serious harm, different factors should be taken into account, including any
action taken by the agency to reduce the risk of harm following the breach; the sensitivity of
the information; and the nature of the harm that may be caused to affected individuals 1866. In
limited situations, an agency is not required to inform individuals, e.g., where doing so would
prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand or endanger the safety of a person, or may
delay the notification (where and as long as providing the information may constitute a risk
for the security of the information that outweighs the benefits of informing the
individuals) 1867. Failure to notify the OPC without a reasonable excuse is an offence subject to
a fine 1868. In this context, an agency may not use the fact that it has taken steps to address the
breach as a defence 1869.

Whereas the accountability requirements under the Privacy Act 2020 have not changed, the
OPC has developed several tools to assist agencies with their compliance efforts. For
example, the OPC issued detailed guidance and a toolkit to carry out privacy impact



1860
       Available at: https://www.privacy.org.nz/privacy-act-2020/information-sharing/approved-information-
sharing-agreements/.
1861
     Section 149 Privacy Act 2020.
1862
     The OPC can exercise its different enforcement powers (see below) and conduct specific reviews of the
operation of the AISAs (Section 158 et seq. Privacy Act 2020).
1863
     https://bills.parliament.nz/v/6/56e3fbe7-1f3d-464e-b54d-08dbae8917ae?Tab=history.
1864
     Where it is not practicable to notify each individual separately, the agency must instead provide public notice
(Section 115(2) Privacy Act 2020).
1865
     Sections 114 and 115, in conjunction with Section 112(1) Privacy Act 2020.
1866
     Section 113 Privacy Act 2020.
1867
     Section 116 Privacy Act 2020.
1868
     Section 118 Privacy Act 2020.
1869
     Section 118 Privacy Act 2020.

                                                       250
assessments 1870. It also launched a “Privacy Trust Mark” in 2018, which may be issued for a
specific product or service on the basis of an assessment of several criteria, including whether
a privacy impact assessment has been carried out, whether the product/service demonstrates
privacy by design and by default, how end-to-end security is demonstrated, etc. 1871

As regards the processing of special categories of data, the New Zealand privacy framework
considers information sensitive depending on the circumstances and context in which it is
processed. The OPC has clarified through guidance that this will generally be the case when
the inferences that can be drawn about the individual from information are potentially
sensitive 1872. This for example applies to information about a person’s race, ethnicity, gender,
sexual orientation, sex life, health, disability, age, membership of an advocacy group, trade
union or political party and religious, cultural or political beliefs 1873., i.e., categories of data
that are also considered sensitive under EU data protection law. The sensitivity of personal
information is a relevant factor to take into in the application of several requirements of the
Privacy Act 2020, e.g., to determine which security safeguards to apply (IPP 5) and whether
the means to collect personal information are fair and not unreasonably intrusive (IPP 4) 1874.

With respect to data subject rights, the New Zealand data protection framework continues to
provide individuals with a right of access and correction 1875, which have been further and
strengthened through legislative developments, as well as case law and OPC guidance. For
example, recent case law has confirmed that the right of access extends to any information
necessary to provide meaningful access, including for instance on the purpose of processing,
the logic involved in the processing of personal information on the basis of algorithms, as
well as third parties with whom information may be shared 1876. In addition, the restrictions to

1870
       Available at: https://privacy.org.nz/publications/guidance-resources/privacy-impact-assessment/ and
https://privacy.org.nz/responsibilities/privacy-impact-assessments/.
1871
           Available       at:      https://privacy.org.nz/resources-2/applying-for-a-privacy-trust-mark/      and
https://www.privacy.org.nz/privacy-for-agencies/applying-for-a-privacy-trust-mark/privacy-trust-mark-criteria-
and-considerations/.
1872
       Available at: https://www.privacy.org.nz/assets/New-order/Your-responsibilities/Privacy-resources-for-
organisations/Sensitive-Personal-Information-and-the-Privacy-Act-2020.pdf
1873
     See also the guidance and case notes of the OPC with respect to health (e.g., https://privacy.org.nz/further-
resources/knowledge-base/view/39?t=204565_283253, Case note 297084 [2019] NZPriv Cmr 11, Case note
269784 [2016] NZ PrivCmr 3), genetic (e.g., https://privacy.org.nz/blog/your-dna-is-only-a-click-away-home-
dna-tests-and-privacy/) and biometric information (e.g., https://privacy.org.nz/further-resources/knowledge-
base/view/277?t=204613_283308). Moreover, New Zealand recently signed the Agreement on the exchange of
personal data between Europol and the designated authorities of New Zealand that contains a definition of
sensitive data covering the same categories.
1874
     See also several cases of the OPC, e.g., Case Note 83994 [2008] NZPrivCmr 6 (August 2008, Case Note
270745 [2016] NZPrivCmr 10 (June 2016) and case law of the Human Rights Review Tribunal, e.g., Taylor v
Orcon [2015] NZHRRT 15.
1875
     IPP 6 and Part 4, subpart 1 (access) and IPP 7 and Part 4, subpart 2 (correction) Privacy Act 2020. Whereas
the Privacy Act 2020 does not contain separate provisions on direct marketing, other instruments continue to
provide for specific protections when personal information is used for direct marketing purposes. This includes
the Unsolicited Electronic Messages Act of 2007 (which imposes restrictions on address-harvesting and prohibits
the sending of commercial electronic messages for marketing purposes without consent of the concerned
individual), as well as specific provisions on the use of personal information for direct marketing purposes in the
Credit Information Privacy Code (which prohibits credit reports from using/disclosing credit information for any
purpose related to marketing or direct marketing, Rule 10(1B) and 11(3)(b) of the Code) and the
Telecommunications Information Privacy Code (which e.g., requires telecommunication agencies to inform
individuals of the right to withdraw their authorisation for the use of their information for direct marketing
purposes, Rule 10(1)(b) of the Code). In addition, there is a Marketing Association voluntary Do Not Call/Mail
registry (https://marketing.org.nz/do-not-call-do-not-mail).
1876
     Naidu v Royal Australasian College of Surgeons [2018] NZHRRT 23.

                                                       251
the right of access have further evolved. Like Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR) 1877, the
New Zealand data protection regime provides agencies with the possibility to refuse to
disclose personal information in response to a request for access from an individual in
specific, limited circumstances 1878, e.g., if disclosure of the information would be likely to
prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand; the prevention, investigation and detection
of offences or would disclose a trade secret 1879. The recent reform added limited additional
grounds for refusal 1880, e.g., where disclosure would be likely to pose a serious threat to the
life or health of an individual 1881, or to public health or public safety; or would create a
significant likelihood of serious harassment of an individual 1882. The Privacy Act 2020 also
introduced the possibility to, instead of refusing access, impose conditions relating to the use
and/or disclosure of the information by the applicant, where one of the exceptions laid down
in the Act applies 1883. Moreover, it provided the OPC with the power to issue a binding
written notice directing agencies to grant individuals access to their personal information (see
below).

Under NZ law, individuals can obtain erasure of their data in different circumstances,
although not expressly formulated as a separated right under Privacy Act 2020. In particular,
exercising the right of correction may lead to deletion 1884, i.e., where this is necessary to
ensure that the information is accurate, up to date, complete and not misleading. In addition,
agencies have to delete personal information that was collected unlawfully or can no longer
be lawfully used (e.g., where the purpose has been obtained) 1885. In those situations,
individuals can obtain deletion before the OPC or the Human Rights Review Tribunal 1886
(HRRT, which may order deletion as one of the possible remedies, see below). Several cases
handled by the OPC and the Tribunal demonstrate that erasure may for instance be obtained
where information was collected without being necessary for a lawful purpose or by means

1877
     Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).
1878
      Case law, as well as guidance and decisions of the OPC clarify the scope of the different exceptions,
including by means of concrete examples, and confirm that the exceptions may not be applied in a blanket
manner, but that each piece of information must be assessed individually to determine whether a specific
exception applies (see e.g., https://www.privacy.org.nz/tools/knowledge-base/view/520?t=218847_301679 and
Kelsey v Minister of Trade [2016] 2 NZLR 218 (HC)). See https://www.privacy.org.nz/privacy-act-
2020/privacy-principles/6/, including the guidance and cases cited there for each of the exceptions. For example,
the ‘likely to prejudice’ test requires a “distinct or significant possibility, a serious or real or substantial risk that
the prejudice might eventuate” (Commissioner of Police v Ombudsman [1988] 1 NZLR 385 (CA), whereas the
test of ‘significant likelihood’ refers to a very likely outcome of releasing the information
(https://www.privacy.org.nz/privacy-act-2020/privacy-principles/6/harassment/#_ftn2). Moreover, invoking
certain exceptions (e.g., the protection of other individuals) requires a balancing of the different interests
involved (https://www.privacy.org.nz/privacy-act-2020/privacy-principles/6/unwarranted-disclosure-of-another-
persons-affairs/).
1879
     Sections 49-53 Privacy Act 2020.
1880
     Section 49(1)(a) Privacy Act 2020.
1881
     To rely on this exception, there must be some evidence to indicate that the threat in fact exists and the
importance of protecting the health and safety of the person outweighs the benefits of providing access, see
https://www.privacy.org.nz/privacy-act-2020/privacy-principles/6/serious-threat-to-life-health-or-safety/.
1882
     Harassment is repeated, unwanted contact in ways that fall short of posing physical danger but that seriously
detracts from the quality of life (https://www.privacy.org.nz/privacy-act-2020/privacy-principles/6/harassment/).
1883
     Section 54 Privacy Act 2020.
1884
     See the definition of correction in Section 7(1) Privacy Act 2020.
1885
     IPP 9.
1886
     The Human Rights Review Tribunal is a specialised, easily accessible court that mainly deals with claims
concerning human rights (including privacy) violations.

                                                          252
that intruded to an unreasonable extent on the personal affairs of an individual (in violation of
IPP 1 and 4) 1887, upon request of an individual to erase incorrect or misleading
information 1888, and where information is disclosed unlawfully 1889. Moreover, on the basis of
the Harmful Digital Communications Act 2015, an individual that has suffered or will suffer
serious emotional distress as a result of a digital communication 1890 may apply to a court that
may order the deletion of such material 1891.

Finally, the rules on international transfers have been significantly strengthened since the
adoption of the adequacy decision. The previous regime – by which the OPC could prohibit
transfers to third countries if the personal information was received from another third country
in certain situations 1892 – remains in place but has been complemented by a comprehensive set
of rules that agencies have to comply with in order to disclose personal information outside
New Zealand 1893. First, such a transfer may only take place if the concerned individual
authorises 1894 the transfer (after having been expressly informed that the recipient may not be
required to protect the information in a way that provides comparable safeguards to the
Privacy Act 2020). Alternatively, a transfer may take place if the transferring agency believes
on reasonable grounds 1895 that (1) the recipient is subject to the Privacy Act 2020 (because it
is carrying on business in New Zealand, see earlier); (2) the recipient is subject to privacy


1887
     Armfield v Naughton [2014] NZHRRT 48.
1888
     Case Note 9257 [1997] NZPrivCmr 4 (1 July 1997), case note 256329 [2016] NZ PrivCmr 1.
1889
     Hammond v NZCU Baywide [2015] NZHRRT 6 (2 March 2015), where the agency was also ordered to
request all third parties to whom the information was disclosed to delete the information and seek written
confirmation thereof.
1890
     This refers to any form of electronic communication, including text messages, writing, photographs, pictures,
recordings, or other matters communicated electronically, (Section 4 Harmful Digital Communications Act).
1891
     Section 11 and 19(1)(a) Harmful Digital Communications Act.
1892
     I.e., where the information is likely to be transferred to a country where it will not be subject to a law
providing comparable safeguards to the Privacy Act 2020 and the transfer would likely lead to a contravention of
the basic principles of the national application of the Guidelines of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation
and Development (as set out in Schedule 8 Privacy Act 2020, see Section 193 of the Act).
1893
     IPP 12, which applies when information is disclosed to other entities processing the information on their own
behalf (i.e., ‘controllers’). The sharing of personal information by a New Zealand agency with a third party for
processing (i.e., a ‘processor’) on behalf of the first agency is not considered a disclosure within the meaning of
the Privacy Act 2020. In particular, where an agency (including in a third country) holds personal information as
an agent for another agency (e.g., for safe custody or processing) and does not use it for its own purposes, the
information is considered to be held by the agency on whose behalf that information is held/processed (Section
11 Privacy Act 2020). Agencies therefore remain responsible for the activities of their processors (i.e., agents,
service providers, etc.). For example, the New Zealand agency must do everything reasonably within its power
to prevent unauthorised use or unauthorised disclosure of the information (IPP 5(b)). This may for example be
achieved through a contract requiring a service provider to put in place sufficient security measures, or by
providing appropriate training (see for example Case Note 2663 [1998] NZPrivCmr 6). In addition, individuals
can exercise their rights with respect to the data that is held overseas vis-à-vis the New Zealand agency.
1894
     The notion of ‘authorisation’ requires positive, rather than passive consent by the individual. There must be a
decision that conveys authority to the agency to undertake a particular action. In addition, an individual must
understand what he/she is agreeing to, and the agency must believe on reasonable grounds that the individual has
indeed provided authorisation. See e.g., Case Note 2976 [1996] NZPrivCmr 1, in which the OPC found that the
failure by an individual to object to collection does not amount to authorisation, and Case Note 19740 [2002]
NZPrivCmr 5 in which the OPC found that an individual does not implicitly authorise an agency to use his/her
information because it has been given to the agency. See also https://www.privacy.org.nz/blog/click-to-consent-
not-good-enough-anymore/.
1895
      The test of « reasonable belief » in the Privacy Act 2020 has a subjective and objective component. In
particular, the agency must believe that the relevant exception applies (subjective) and there must be a
reasonable basis for that belief (objective), see also Deeming v. Whangarei District Council (Discovery) (WDC)
[2015] NZHRRT 37, at 201-203. The burden of proof lies with the agency that relied on a specific exception.

                                                       253
laws that, overall, provide comparable safeguards to those in New Zealand 1896; (3) the
recipient is a participant in a “prescribed binding scheme” or is located in a “prescribed
country” 1897; or (4) the recipient is otherwise required to protect the information in a way that,
overall, provides comparable safeguards to those in the Privacy Act 2020 (in particular
because it entered into an agreement with the New Zealand agency). In practice, the OPC
recommends that agencies rely on contractual instruments providing for comparable data
protection safeguards in order to transfer personal information overseas 1898. To assist agencies
in developing such instruments, the OPC has developed model contract clauses, which share a
number of similarities with the standard contractual clauses adopted by the European
Commission (e.g., with respect to data protection principles, individual rights, onward
transfers, and redress) 1899.

The abovementioned requirements do not apply in limited circumstances, i.e., if the
information is disclosed to the concerned individual; if the source of the information is a
publicly available publication 1900 and it would not be unfair or unreasonable to provide the
information in the circumstances of the case; if the disclosure is necessary to enable New
Zealand’s intelligence agencies to perform their functions; if the disclosure is necessary on
important public interest grounds (e.g., to avoid prejudice to the maintenance of the law by a
public sector agency, for the conduct of legal proceedings) and it is not reasonably practicable
in the circumstances to comply with the general transfer requirements; or if the disclosure is
necessary to prevent or lessen a serious threat to public health/safety or the life or health of an
individual and it is not reasonably practicable in the circumstances to comply with the general
transfer requirements 1901.

       1.2. Oversight, enforcement and redress

The OPC is the independent authority in charge of the oversight and enforcement of the New
Zealand data protection rules 1902. Its tasks include engaging in awareness activities,

1896
     According to OPC guidance, the following elements should be taken into account in assessing whether a
country’s privacy laws offer comparable protections to the Privacy Act 2020: the scope of the privacy laws, the
protections around personal information, rights of access and correction for individuals, accessibility and
meaningfulness of their complaint processes, and independence of oversight and enforcement (see e.g.,
https://privacy.org.nz/responsibilities/your-obligations/disclosing-personal-information-outside-new-
zealand/decision-tree-page/).
1897
     The Privacy Act 2020 provides the New Zealand government with the power to, after consulting the OPC,
adopt regulations “prescribing” a binding scheme (i.e., an internationally recognised scheme in which the
participants agree to be bound by specified measures to protect personal information and mechanisms to enforce
compliance with those measures, see Section 7(1) Privacy Act 2020) or country, on which agencies could rely to
transfer personal information. Such regulations may only be adopted if the government is satisfied that personal
information will be protected in a way that provides comparable safeguards to the Privacy Act 2020 under the
binding scheme or the country’s privacy laws (Section 213 and 214 Privacy Act 2020). So far, the government
has not made use of these powers.
1898
             https://privacy.org.nz/responsibilities/your-obligations/disclosing-personal-information-outside-new-
zealand/.
1899
      See the model contract clauses for cross border transfer of personal information, available at:
https://www.privacy.org.nz/responsibilities/your-obligations/disclosing-personal-information-outside-new-
zealand/.
1900
     This refers to a publication (including a register, list or roll of data) in printed or electronic form that is, or
will be, generally available to members of the public (see the definition in Section 7(1) Privacy Act 2020).
1901
     IPP 12(1) and (2) in conjunction with IPP 11(b), (d), I, (f) and (g).
1902
     The OPC is headed by the Privacy Commissioner, an Independent Crown Entity, appointed by the Governor-
General on the recommendation of the Minister of Justice for a renewable term of 5 years (Section 13 Privacy
Act 2020, in conjunction with Section 28(1)(b) and 32(1)(b) Crown Entities Act). Certain individuals, such as

                                                         254
conducting audits of agencies upon their request, carrying (general) inquiries, undertaking
research, examining and advising on proposed legislation, etc. 1903.

In terms of powers, the OPC may carry out general inquiries into any matter (including any
practice or procedure) if it appears that the privacy of individuals is being, or may be
infringed 1904; conduct an audit to ascertain whether personal information is handled in
accordance with the IPPs, upon request of an agency 1905; and initiate investigations (on the
basis of a complaint or on its own initiative) concerning an interference with the privacy of an
individual 1906. In carrying out inquiries or investigations, the OPC has access to all relevant
information 1907. In principle, the OPC aims at reaching a settlement between the parties (in
case the investigation was initiated on the basis of a complaint) or obtaining a satisfactory
assurance against the repetition of the action that was investigated 1908. Where the OPC is
unable to secure a settlement or assurance, or an agency has acted against a previously
reached settlement or provided assurance, it may refer the matter to the Director of Human
Rights Proceedings 1909. The Director (or the individual themselves) may in turn initiate
proceedings before the HRRT 1910, which may grant appropriate remedies (e.g., a declaration
that an action is an interference with privacy, a corrective order, damages, or other relief 1911).

The Privacy Act 2020 significantly strengthened the powers of the OPC, by introducing the
possibility to (1) adopt binding “access directions”, i.e., decisions with respect to individuals’
requests for access to their personal information ordering agencies to provide individuals with
access in any manner the OPC considers appropriate 1912; and (2) issue binding compliance
notices if a breach of the Act (or a code of practice) has occurred, requiring the concerned
agency to remedy the breach (including by identifying the specific steps the OPC considers
needed) 1913. The OPC can enforce a compliance notice before the HRRT if there is reason to

members of parliament or of local authorities cannot be appointed (Section 30(2) Crown Entities Act and Section
15(1) Privacy Act 2020). The Commissioner may only be removed for just cause (which includes misconduct,
inability to perform the functions of office and neglect of duty) by the Governor-General, on the advice of the
responsible Minister and after consultation with the Attorney-General (Section 39 and 40 Crown Entities Act).
The Privacy Act 2020 (Section 20) expressly provides that the Commissioner has the duty to act independently
in performing statutory duties and powers.
1903
     Section 17 Privacy Act 2020.
1904
     Section 17(1)(i), in conjunction with Section 203 Privacy Act 2020.
1905
     Section 17(1)(l) Privacy Act 2020.
1906
     Section 79 Privacy Act 2020. An action is an interference with privacy if (1) an agency has made a decision
without proper basis with respect to the individual’s request for access or correction (e.g., refusing to grant
access); or (2) there has been a breach of an IPP or the requirements for notifying data breaches to individuals
that has caused (or may cause) loss, detriment, damage or injury to an individual; has adversely affected, or may
adversely affect, the rights, benefits, privileges, obligations, or interests of that individual; or has resulted in, or
may result in, significant humiliation, loss of dignity or injury to the feelings of that individual (Section 69(2)
Privacy Act 2020). See also https://privacy.org.nz/tools/knowledge-base/view/211.
1907
     See Sections 86-90, in conjunction with sections 202 and 203 Privacy Act 2020.
1908
     Section 77, 83, 91(3)-(4) and 94(2)-(3) Privacy Act 2020.
1909
     Section 78, 91(5)(b) and 94(4)(a) Privacy Act 2020. In addition, the Commissioner may report significant
breaches of duty or misconduct to the competent authorities (Section 96 Privacy Act 2020). The Director is an
independent institution that assists individuals in bringing their case before the HRRT, or represents individuals
before the Tribunal, on referral by OPC.
1910
     Section 97 Privacy Act 2020.
1911
     Section 102 Privacy Act 2020.
1912
     Section 92 Privacy Act 2020.
1913
     Section 123 and 126 Privacy Act 2020. In deciding whether to issue a compliance notice, the OPC may take
different factors into account, e.g., whether there is another means for dealing with the breach, the seriousness of
the breach and likelihood of a repeat, and the number of affected individuals (Section 124 Privacy Act 2020).

                                                         255
believe that the agency has not remedied or will not remedy the violation, or the agency fails
to report timely on the steps taken to remedy the violation 1914. The Tribunal may order that
the agency comply with the notice or perform any act specified in the order 1915. Failure to
comply with an order of the Tribunal constitutes an offence and may be subject to a fine.
Fines are imposed by the District Court, which takes a number of factors into account in
determining the level of the fine and may not exceed 10 000 NZD for each charge 1916. The
OPC may also publish information on compliance notices, including the identity of agencies
to whom they have been issued, if it considers it in the public interest to do so 1917.

As regards the possibility for individuals to obtain redress, different avenues continue to be
available in the New Zealand system. In particular, individuals may turn directly to
agencies 1918, file a complaint with the OPC 1919 and obtain judicial redress (against
agencies 1920 or against the findings of the OPC 1921), which may lead to different types of
remedies, including injunctive relief and compensation for damages 1922.

Its annual reports show that the OPC deals with a number of investigations and complaints on
an annual basis. For example, between June 2018 – June 2019, the OPC closed 894
investigation files and referred two cases to the HRRT (while 23 individuals turned to the
HRRT themselves), and between June 2019 – June 2020, the OPC closed 769 investigation
files and referred three cases to the HRRT (23 individuals turned to the HRRT

1914
     Section 130(1) Privacy Act 2020.
1915
     Section 133(1) Privacy Act 2020.
1916
      Section 133(3) Privacy Act 2020. See also the Sentencing Act 2002 (Sections 7-9, 13-14, 40-41), according
to which the court must inter alia take into account the gravity and seriousness of the offence, the deterrent effect
of the fine, and possible aggravating (e.g., the vulnerability of the victim) and mitigating factors, when deciding
on the level of the fine.
1917
     Section 129 Privacy Act 2020.
1918
     See e.g., Section 74(1)(a) Privacy Act 2020.
1919
     Section 70 Privacy Act 2020. A complaint may be filed by or on behalf of one or more individuals (Section
71 Privacy Act 2020).
1920
      Individuals may initiate proceedings against an agency before the HRRT in different situations, e.g., if the
OPC decides not to investigate a complaint after using endeavours to settle it, investigates but does not take a
decision on a complaint or does not refer it to the HRRT, or if the Director of Human Rights Proceedings decides
not to launch proceedings before the HRRT (Section 98 Privacy Act 2020). Decisions of the HRRT may be
appealed to the higher courts, see Section 111 Privacy Act 2020, in conjunction with Section 123-124 of the
Human Rights Act 1993. The right of access can directly be enforced against public authorities before the
ordinary courts (Section 31(2) Privacy Act 2020).
1921
      For example, individuals may challenge an access direction before the HRRT (Section 105 Privacy Act
2020). More generally, individuals may obtain judicial review of decisions of the OPC before the ordinary courts
pursuant to the Judicial Review Procedure Act 2016, see also Mitchell v Privacy Commissioner [2017] NZAR
1706; Henderson v Privacy Commissioner [2010] NZHC 554. A court may overturn a decision on the basis that
it is considered to be unlawful, irrational, unreasonable or unfair, depending on the circumstances.
1922
     With respect to complaints handled by the OPC, see earlier on access directions and compliance notices. As
regards proceedings before the HRRT, the Tribunal may order a variety of remedies, including an order
restraining the agency from continuing or repeating the violation, an order that the agency remedies the
violation, damages and any other relief it considers appropriate (Section 102 Privacy Act 2020). In terms of
damages, the HRRT may award compensation in respect of pecuniary loss, loss of any benefit (whether or not of
a monetary kind), as well as humiliation, loss of dignity and injury to the feelings of the aggrieved individual
(Section 103 Privacy Act 2020). Compensation for damages can also be obtained before the ordinary courts
under the tort of invasion of privacy (which relies on two elements: the existence of facts in respect of which
there was a reasonable expectation of privacy, and publicity given to those facts that would be considered highly
offensive to an objective reasonable person, see e.g., Hosking v Runting [2005] 1 NZLR 1 (CA)) or intrusion
upon seclusion (for which an plaintiff must show an intentional or unauthorised intrusion; into seclusion (namely
intimate personal activity, space or affairs), involving infringement of a reasonable expectation of privacy that is
highly offensive to a reasonable person, see e.g., C v Holland [2012] NZHC 2155, [2012] 3 NZLR 672).

                                                        256
themselves) 1923. This for instance includes an inquiry into the unlawful sharing of data
between credit companies 1924 and investigations into the unlawful disclosure of data to the
police by a bank 1925 and the use of inaccurate debt records 1926. In the same reporting periods,
the OPC received a total of 427 voluntary notifications on data breaches. In addition, the OPC
conducted several general inquiries, e.g., into the police’s conduct relating to the
photographing of members of the public, the use and disclosure of COVID-19 patient
information by the Ministry of Health, and Trade Me’s (New Zealand’s largest online auction
website) privacy policy and compliance with the Privacy Act 1993 1927.

According to the first annual report after the entry into force of the Privacy Act 2020, the
OPC received 531 complaints (and closed 580 complaints) during June 2020 – June 2021, and
received 544 data breach notifications (which have become mandatory after the reform)1928.
In September 2021, the OPC issued its first compliance notice, addressed to the Reserve Bank
in relation to its response to a cyber-attack 1929. The notice was closed in September 2022,
after the Reserve Bank introduced all the improvements requested by the OPC 1930.

The OPC has also issued guidance on various topics, including on health data, biometric data,
privacy impact assessments, the use of data and analytics by government agencies, contact
tracing and individual rights 1931. Moreover, it developed several tools to assist agencies with
training and compliance efforts (e.g., e-learning tools 1932, a privacy statement generator 1933
and a platform to report data breaches 1934), as well as to help individuals with exercising their
rights (e.g., through a dedicated online tool by which the right of access can be exercised) 1935.

Finally, the OPC regularly engages with stakeholders, through campaigns regional visits,
presentations, livestreams (so-called PrivacyLive events), responding to public inquiries
(including through a call centre) and podcasts 1936. The OPC also advised the government and
parliament on the protection of personal data in relation to bills and legislative reforms
(including through public submissions), e.g., in the context of the response to the COVID-19

1923
      See the 2019 annual report (available at: https://www.privacy.org.nz/assets/New-order/Resources-
/Publications/Corporate-reports/Privacy-Commissioner.pdf) and 2020 annual report (available at:
https://www.privacy.org.nz/assets/New-order/Resources-/Publications/Corporate-reports/Privacy-Commissioner-
Annual-Report-20.pdf).
1924
     Available at: 2020-09-11-illion-Inquiry-Report.pdf (privacy.org.nz).
1925
     Available at: https://privacy.org.nz/publications/statements-media-releases/privacy-commissioner-welcomes-
westpac-privacy-breach-settlement/.
1926
     Available at: https://privacy.org.nz/publications/case-notes-and-court-decisions/case-note-312145/.
1927
     Available at: https://www.privacy.org.nz/publications/commissioner-inquiries/.
1928
         Available        at:     https://www.privacy.org.nz/assets/New-order/Resources-/Publications/Corporate-
reports/Annual-Report-2021.pdf.
1929
     Available at: https://www.privacy.org.nz/publications/statements-media-releases/compliance-notice-issued-
to-reserve-bank-of-new-zealand-following-cyber-attack/.
1930
        Available      at:     https://www.privacy.org.nz/publications/statements-media-releases/first-privacy-act-
compliance-notice-successfully-closed/.
1931
     Available at: https://www.privacy.org.nz/publications/guidance-resources/.
1932
      See e.g., on reporting privacy breaches, health data, employment and privacy, etc., see
https://www.privacy.org.nz/tools/online-privacy-training-free/.
1933
     Available at: https://www.privacy.org.nz/tools/privacy-statement-generator/.
1934
     Available at: https://www.privacy.org.nz/responsibilities/privacy-breaches/notify-us/.
1935
     Available at: https://www.privacy.org.nz/tools/aboutme-request-my-info-tool/.
1936
     See e.g., the annual reports of 2019, 2020 and 2021. For example, the OPC gave 112 presentations in 2019,
89 in 2020 151 in 2021; and handled 7947 public inquiries in 2019, 7734 in 2020 and 9165 in 2021. In 2020, the
OPC launched a broad public campaign – “Privacy is Precious” – targeted specifically at certain groups,
including small business and non-profit organisations (see the annual report 2021, p. 21.

                                                       257
pandemic, the use of DNA in criminal investigations, counterterrorism and tax
administration 1937.

2. ACCESS TO AND USE OF PERSONAL DATA TRANSFERRED FROM THE
   EUROPEAN UNION BY PUBLIC AUTHORITIES IN NEW ZEALAND

       2.1. General legal framework

The limitations and safeguards that apply to the collection and subsequent use of personal
data by New Zealand public authorities for criminal law enforcement and national security
purposes follow from the overarching constitutional framework, specific laws regulating data
access, as well as the rules that apply to the processing of personal data.

New Zealand does not have a single written constitution, but a number of statutes are of
particular constitutional importance. These statutes set out principles relating to fundamental
rights and freedoms that must be taken into account when developing or proposing new
legislation. These include the Bill of Rights Act 1990, the Human Rights Act 1993 and the
Privacy Act 2020, which are relevant for the protection of personal data.

Section 21 of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act of 1990 guarantees the right to be secure
against unreasonable search or seizure, whether of the person, property, correspondence or
otherwise. This right may be subject “only to such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can
be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society” 1938. The New Zealand Supreme
Court has held that Section 21 protects against unjustified intrusions on an individual’s
“reasonable expectation of privacy” 1939, which is directed at protecting “a biographical core of
personal information which individuals in a free and democratic society would wish to
maintain and control from dissemination by the state” 1940. It applies to information that “tends
to reveal intimate details of the lifestyle and personal choices of the individual” 1941.

To comply with the Bill of Rights Act, any search or seizure must be reasonable. In this
regard, the Supreme Court of New Zealand has clarified that a search or seizure can be
unreasonable either because it occurred at all or because of the unreasonable manner in which
it is carried out 1942. In particular, to determine whether a search is unreasonable, “it is
necessary to look at the nature of the place or object which was being searched, the degree of
intrusiveness into the privacy of the person or persons affected and the reason why the search


1937
     See https://www.privacy.org.nz/publications/reports-to-parliament-and-government/. With respect to data
use and analytics by public authorities, see https://www.privacy.org.nz/news-and-publications/guidance-
resources/principles-for-the-safe-and-effective-use-of-data-and-analytics-guidance/.
1938
     Section 5 of the Bill of Rights Act.
1939
     R v Alsford [2017] 1 NZLR 170. To determine whether there is a reasonable expectation of privacy, both
subjective and objective elements should be taken into account: firstly, whether the individual had a subjective
expectation of privacy in the circumstances (the subjective element); and, if so, whether that expectation is one
that society is prepared to recognise as reasonable (the objective element), see Hamed v R [2011] NZSC 101 at
[163]-[164].
1940
     R v Alsford [2017] NZSC 42 at [63].
1941
     R v Alsford [2017] 1 NZLR 170 at [56]. For example, whereas individuals generally do not have a
reasonable expectation of privacy in basic electricity consumption data, there could be situations where
electricity data could reveal intimate details about an individual (e.g., from smart meters), in which case a
reasonable expectation of privacy may arise (R v Alsford [2017] 1 NZLR 170).
1942
     Hamed v R [2011] NZSC 101, Blanchard J, at [172].

                                                      258
was occurring” 1943. This requires considering factors such as the nature of the information at
issue, the nature of the relationships between the parties, the place where the information was
obtained and the manner in which it was obtained 1944.

As described in more detail in sections 2.2.1 and 2.3.1, the general principles following from
the Bill of Rights Act are reflected in specific laws that regulate the powers of law
enforcement and national security authorities.

Moreover, the processing of personal information by New Zealand public authorities
(including criminal law enforcement and national security authorities) is subject to the
Privacy Act 2020. The Privacy Act 2020 lays down the conditions under which public
authorities may use and disclose personal information; reflects the principles of purpose
limitation, data accuracy, transparency and storage limitation; and provides individuals with a
right to obtain access to or correction of their personal data (see section 1.1).

With respect to the activities of criminal law enforcement authorities, the Privacy Act 2020
applies in its entirety. In addition, following a reform that entered into force with the
Intelligence and Security Act 2017, intelligence and security agencies are subject to the
majority of the IPPs, including the Principles governing the use and disclosure of information
(IPP 10 and 11), security (IPP 5), purpose limitation, data accuracy and limited data retention
(IPP 1, 8 and 9) as well as the Principles providing for individual rights (IPP 6 and 7) 1945. The
only principles that do not apply to personal information collected by intelligence and security
agencies are IPP 2 (i.e., the general requirement to collect information directly from the
individual), IPP 3 (concerning transparency) and IPP 4(b) 1946 (concerning the manner of
collection) 1947.

The general limitations and safeguards described in this section can be invoked by individuals
before independent administrative bodies (e.g., the Independent Police Conduct Authority),
the OPC and courts to obtain redress (see sections 2.2.4 and 2.3.4).

       2.2. Access and use by New Zealand public authorities for criminal law enforcement
            purposes

New Zealand law imposes a number of limitations on the access and use of personal data for
criminal law enforcement purposes and provides oversight and redress mechanisms. The
conditions under which such access can take place and the safeguards applicable to the use of
those powers are described in the following sections.

          2.2.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards


1943
     Hamed v R [2011] NZSC 101, Blanchard J, at [172].
1944
     R v Alsford [2017] 1 NZLR 170 at [63]. For example, contractual terms and conditions with customers may
be relevant to whether there is a reasonable expectation of privacy, but these are not necessarily determinative (R
v Alsford [2017] 1 NZLR 170 at [68]). Similarly, while in urgent circumstances a search by a voluntary request
may be reasonable, a search may be unreasonable if there is time to obtain a production order or search warrant
(R v Alsford [2017] 1 NZLR 170 at [64]).
1945
     Prior to this reform, intelligence agencies were largely exempt from the IPPs (since only the IPPs regarding
individual’s rights of access and correction applied).
1946
     However, IPP 4(a), according to which a collection must take pace by lawful means, still applies.
1947
     Section 28 Privacy Act 2020.

                                                       259
Personal data transferred under the adequacy decision and processed by New Zealand
agencies may be obtained by criminal law enforcement authorities by means of investigative
measures under the Search and Surveillance Act, on the basis of anti-money laundering and
anti-terrorist financing legislation or through voluntary disclosures 1948.

The Search and Surveillance Act 2012 empowers law enforcement authorities to obtain
evidential material (i.e., evidence of the offence, or any other item, tangible or intangible, of
relevance to the investigation of the offence 1949) in relation to an offence or a suspected
offence through searches, production orders and surveillance device warrants. The
information that may be collected can take different forms, such as phone call recordings,
financial records and e-mails. The Act generally applies to the Police, but also governs certain
activities of other law enforcement authorities, such as animal welfare inspectors, fisheries
inspectors, product safety officers, food officers, forestry officers, gambling inspectors,
immigration officers, etc. 1950.

The Search and Surveillance Act lays down clear and precise rules on the scope and
application of these measures, thereby ensuring that the interference with the rights of
individuals will be limited to what is necessary for a specific criminal investigation and
proportionate to the pursued purpose. As explained in more detail below, prior judicial
authorisation is in principle required in order to access personal information on the basis of
the Search and Surveillance Act. It is only in exceptional cases that law enforcement
authorities do not have to obtain a judicial warrant. These exceptions are specifically set out
1948
      In addition, the Privacy Act 2020 authorises certain specified public authorities to obtain personal
information held by other specified public authorities. First, it allows one authority (the accessing agency) to
verify the identity of an individual by obtaining information about that individual from another authority (holder
agency), Part 7, Subpart 2 of the Privacy Act 2020. The information that can be accessed on this basis is ‘identity
information’, which inter alia includes biographical details, biometric data, and photographs (Section 164
Privacy Act 2020). Schedule 3 of the Privacy Act 2020 lists, for each accessing agency, the purpose for which
they may access the information and the holder agency from which they may request it. This list can only be
amended by Order in Council following consultation by the Minister of Justice with the OPC. Before
recommending an amendment, the responsible Minister must be satisfied that (1) the purpose for which the
identity information is to be accessed relates to a specified function of the accessing agency and (2) the identity
information to be accessed is no more than reasonably necessary to enable the accessing agency to achieve that
purpose. (Section 168 Privacy Act 2020). Second, the Act authorises certain public authorities to access
specified information held by other public authorities for law enforcement purposes (Part 7, Subpart 3 Privacy
Act 2020). The authorities that may rely on these provisions are listed in Schedule 4 of the Privacy Act 2020
(e.g., the Ministry of Justice, the Serious Fraud Office, the Police, etc.). Only ‘law enforcement information’
(e.g., details of hearings, court document processing, offender identity, etc.) can be accessed on this basis
(Section 171 Privacy Act 2020). For each type of law enforcement information, the public authority authorised
to request access is specifically listed. The list can only be amended by Order in Council following consultation
by the Minister of Justice with the OPC (Section 173 Privacy Act 2020). Thirdly, the Privacy Act 2020 provides
for public authorities to obtain personal information for public service purposes under approved information
sharing agreements (Part 7, subpart 1 Privacy Act 2020), as described in more detail in section 1.1.
1949
     Section 3 Search and Surveillance Act. The Search and Surveillance Act also foresees the possibility for law
enforcement authorities to obtain a declaratory order, i.e., a statement by a judge that he/she is satisfied that the
use of a device, technique or procedure, or the carrying out of an activity is, in the circumstances of the case,
reasonable and lawful (Section 65 Search and Surveillance Act). Such an order is advisory in nature and does not
affect the jurisdiction of any court to examine the lawfulness and reasonableness of the underlying activity.
Authorities may apply for a declaratory order if (1) they wish to use a device, technique or procedure, or carry
out an activity that is not specifically authorised by another statutory regime, and (2) the use of that device,
technique or procedure, or the carrying out of the activity, may constitute an intrusion into the reasonable
expectation of privacy of any person (Section 66 Search and Surveillance Act). A declaratory order must inter
alia contain a description of the device, technique, procedure or activity, as well as details on the person, place,
vehicle or other thing that will be subjected to the proposed activity.
1950
     Schedule to the Search and Surveillance Act.

                                                        260
in the Act. At the same time, even in those exceptional cases, case law has clarified that a
warrant is to be preferred if it is possible to obtain one without prejudicing the purpose of the
search 1951.

Searches or seizures to access a place, vehicle or other things (e.g., a computer or remote
server) may only take place if (1) there are reasonable grounds to suspect that an offence
punishable by imprisonment has been committed, is being committed or will be committed
and (2) there are reasonable grounds to believe that the search will find evidential material in
respect of the offence 1952. In principle, a search warrant must be obtained from a court, which
must specify the target, the period during which it may be used and the conditions for the
search/seizure 1953. Searches or seizures may be carried out without a warrant only under
specific conditions set out by law, e.g., when effecting arrest 1954, in urgent circumstances 1955,
in relation to certain serious offences (e.g., a terrorist act) if the evidential material would be
destroyed, concealed, altered or damaged if the search would be delayed to obtain a
warrant 1956. In this case, a written report must be provided to the Commissioner of the Police
as soon as practicable, 1957 with a summary of the circumstances surrounding the exercise of
the power and the reasons why it was exercised, together with an explanation whether
evidential material was obtained and whether criminal proceedings have been brought or are
being considered 1958. The Commissioner of the Police must in turn report on the use of
warrantless powers in its public annual report 1959.

In case of a seizure (regardless of whether it took place on the basis of a warrant or not), the
concerned individual must be provided with written notice and a copy of the warrant/legal
authority at the time of the seizure or as soon as practicable afterwards, but no later than seven
days 1960. Notification of the individual may be deferred after applying to a judge for a
postponement on the grounds that notification would endanger the safety of any person or



1951
     Hall v R [2018] NZCA 279, [2019] 2 NZLR 325; Moore v R [2022] NZCA 109 and Swain v R [2015]
NZCA 216.
1952
     Section 6 Search and Surveillance Act. As regards the standards of ‘reasonable grounds to believe’ and
‘reasonable grounds to suspect’, case law has clarified that ‘belief’ means that “there has to be an objective and
credible basis for thinking that a search will turn up the item(s) named in the warrant”, whereas ‘suspicion’
means that “it is likely that a situation exists” (“the issuing officer must hold the view that the state of affairs the
applicant officer is suggesting actually exists”), See R v Williams at [213].
1953
     Sections 3(1) and 6, in conjunction with Section 102-108 Search and Surveillance Act. The application for a
search warrant itself must contain inter alia the grounds on which the application is made; a description of the
place, vehicle or thing to be searched; a description of the information believed to be there; and the period for
which the warrant is sought (Section 98 Search and Surveillance Act). Copies of the application for a warrant
and/or the search warrant itself must be kept by the competent court and the applicant (Section 101 Search and
Surveillance Act). After a search has been carried out, the court may require a report detailing, inter alia, whether
the search warrant was executed, whether it resulted in the seizure of evidential material (and if so, whether that
material was specified in the warrant) and whether any criminal proceedings were brought that relate to the
seized material (Section 104 Search and Surveillance Act).
1954
     Section 7 and 8 Search and Surveillance Act.
1955
     I.e., if an offence is being committed or is about to be committed that would likely cause injury to any person
or serious damage to any property, or there is risk to the life or safety of a person that requires an emergency
response (Section 14 Search and Surveillance Act).
1956
     15 - Search and Surveillance Act.
1957
     Section 169(1) and (2) Search and Surveillance Act.
1958
     Section 169(3) Search and Surveillance Act.
1959
     Section 170 Search and Surveillance Act.
1960
     Section 133 Search and Surveillance Act.

                                                         261
prejudice ongoing investigations 1961. The postponement may not exceed 12 months and may
be repeated only once, again for a maximum of 12 months 1962.

Specific limitations and safeguards apply to carrying out surveillance, i.e., to intercept private
communications, use a tracking device, observe and record private activities, or use a
surveillance device, which may in principle only take place on the basis of a judicial
‘surveillance device warrant’ 1963. Moreover, trespass surveillance 1964 (other than by means of
a tracking device) and interception devices (to intercept private communications) 1965 may
only be deployed to obtain information in relation to offences punishable by a term of
imprisonment of seven years or more, certain offences covered by the Arms Act of 1983 and
certain offences laid down in the Psychoactive Substances Act of 2013 1966. A surveillance
device warrant may only be issued if there are reasonable grounds to suspect that an offence
has been/is being/will be committed and there are reasonable grounds to believe that the
proposed use of the surveillance device will obtain evidence in respect of the offence 1967.

Once the search has been carried out, the Search and Surveillance Act provides additional
safeguards in the form of specific reporting and transparency requirements. Within one month
after the expiry of the period specified in the warrant, the person carrying out the surveillance
must report to the judge that issued the warrant 1968. The report must specify whether the
surveillance resulted in obtaining evidence, whether or not this evidence was specified in the
warrant, the circumstances in which the surveillance was carried out, and whether criminal
proceedings have been brought as a result 1969. Upon receipt of the report, the issuing judge
may give directions as to the destruction or retention of the obtained material, report to the
chief executive of the relevant agency about breaches of the issued warrant, or order that the
subject of surveillance is notified 1970.

Warrantless surveillance activities are only allowed in exceptional situations, for example for
recording what an enforcement officers observes when being lawfully in private premises,
when recording an oral communication with the consent of at least one of the persons


1961
     Section 134(1) Search and Surveillance Act.
1962
     Section134(3) Search and Surveillance Act. A second postponement may not be granted unless the thing
seized is a copy of information or is an unlawful item (e.g., narcotics), Section 135 Search and Surveillance Act.
1963
     Section 46 Search and Surveillance Act.
1964
     I.e., surveillance involving trespass to land or goods, see Section 3(1) Search and Surveillance Act.
1965
     An interception device is defined as any electronic, mechanical, electromagnetic, optical or electro optical
instrument, apparatus, equipment or other device that is used or can be used to intercept or record a private
communication (including telecommunications). It does not include a hearing aid or similar device. See Section
3(1) Search and Surveillance Act.
1966
     Section 45 Search and Surveillance Act
1967
     Section 51(a) Search and Surveillance Act. The application for a surveillance device warrant must set out the
grounds on which the application is made, the suspected offence, the type of surveillance device to be used, the
name and address of the object of the proposed surveillance, a description of the evidential material sought and
the period for which the warrant is sought (Section 49(1) Search and Surveillance Act).
1968
     Section 59(1) Search and Surveillance Act.
1969
      Section 59(2) Search and Surveillance Act. Similar reporting requirements apply for warrantless
surveillance, see Section 60 Search and Surveillance Act.
1970
     Section 61(1) Search and Surveillance Act. A judge may not notify the subject of surveillance unless the
warrant should not have been issued/there was a serious breach of the law or the conditions of the warrant, and
the public interest in notification outweighs a potential prejudice to any law enforcement investigation, the safety
of informants, international relations of the law enforcement agency, etc (Section 61(2) and (3) Search and
Surveillance Act).

                                                       262
involved, or in emergency situations 1971. In emergency situations, a surveillance device may
only be used if obtaining a warrant would be impracticable in the circumstances, for a period
not exceeding 48 hours 1972. The enforcement officer must have reasonable grounds to suspect
that certain specific crimes described in the Act have been, are being or are about to be
committed 1973 and that the use of a surveillance device is necessary to prevent it. Within one
month, the enforcement officer must report to a judge whether the surveillance resulted in
obtaining evidence of the relevant offense, preventing the offense from being committed or
averting the emergency, as well as the circumstances in which the device was used 1974. A
judge receiving such a report may give directions as to the destruction or retention of the
obtained material, order that the individual is notified or report to the chief executive of the
relevant agency if he/she considers that the use of the device was not lawful 1975.

Under the Search and Surveillance Act, a law enforcement authority may also obtain a
production order to require another agency to produce documents, for instance financial
records, call associated data and the content of communications that may be stored in the
normal course of business 1976. A production order may only be issued by a court if there are
reasonable grounds to suspect that an offence has been committed, is being committed or will
be committed and there are reasonable grounds to believe that the documents sought
constitute evidential material in respect of the offense and are in the possession or under the
control of the person against whom the order is sought (or will do so while the order is in
force) 1977. A production order must inter alia contain information on the grounds on which the
order is made, the documents required to be given and the person to whom it is directed1978.
Production orders are in force for a maximum of 30 days after the order is issued 1979.

In addition to disclosing information pursuant to coercive powers adopted under the Search
and Surveillance Act, private operators may in certain circumstances provide information to
public authorities on a voluntary basis to comply with an informal request. Depending on the
nature of the information and whether there is a reasonable expectation of privacy in the
specific circumstances of the case, requesting personal information by law enforcement
authorities may constitute a ‘search’ within the meaning of Section 21 of the New Zealand
Bill of Rights Act 1980, in which case a judicially authorised warrant is in principle required for
the request to be lawful. When receiving information on the basis of voluntary requests,

1971
     See Section 47 and 48 Search and Surveillance Act. This is the case for example for recording what an
enforcement officers observes when being lawfully in private premises, or when recording an oral
communication with the consent of at least one of the persons involved. In addition, no warrant is required in
certain emergency situations.
1972
     Section 48(1) Search and Surveillance Act.
1973
     I.e., crimes punishable by a term of imprisonment of at least 14 years, offences in relation to arms or against
the Arms Act 1983, offences in relation to narcotics, where an offence would likely cause injury to any person or
serious damage to or serious loss of a property (Section 48, in conjunction with Section 14(2), 18(2) and 81(2)(a)
to (d) of the Search and Surveillance Act).
1974
     Section 60 Search and Surveillance Act.
1975
     Section 62 Search and Surveillance Act.
1976
     Section 70 Search and Surveillance Act.
1977
     Section 72 Search and Surveillance Act.
1978
     Section 73(2) Search and Surveillance Act. The application for a production order must set out, inter alia, the
provision authorising an application for a search warrant, a description of the offence that is suspected of been
committed, being committed or will be committed, the grounds for suspicion, and a description of the documents
that are sought (Section 71 Search and Surveillance Act).
1979
     Section 76 Search and Surveillance Act.
1980
     R v Alsford [2017] NZSC 42.

                                                       263
criminal law enforcement authorities may only use or disclose it in accordance with the
requirements described in section 2.2.2.

The conditions under which agencies are allowed to respond to informal requests are laid
down in the Privacy Act 2020 and have been further clarified in guidance of the OPC1981.
First, an agency may disclose personal information when it believes on reasonable grounds
that it is necessary to avoid prejudice to the maintenance of the law, including the prevention,
detection, investigation, prosecution and punishment of offences 1982. As clarified by the OPC,
this exception only covers situations where not providing the information would prejudice or
be detrimental to enforcing the law, i.e., there must be a direct connection between the
disclosure and the prejudice to the maintenance of the law that would otherwise arise 1983. The
OPC has also specified that the requesting law enforcement authority must provide sufficient
information to allow an agency to form a view of whether there are indeed reasonable grounds
to believe that the disclosure of information would be necessary. In particular, it must indicate
a link between the offence being investigated and the relevance of the requested information.
Moreover, when deciding whether or not to disclose, agencies must take the sensitivity or
intimacy of the requested information into account. Second, an agency may disclose personal
information when it believes on reasonable grounds that disclosure is necessary to prevent or
lessen a serious threat to public health or public safety, or the life or health of the individual
concerned or another individual 1984. To determine whether a threat is “serious”, an agency
must take into account the likelihood of the threat being realised, the severity of the
consequences if the threat is realised and the time at which the threat may be realised 1985. The
information may only be disclosed to an authority that will be able to do something to prevent
or lessen the threat 1986.

Finally, criminal law enforcement authorities may also indirectly receive personal data from
the Financial Intelligence Unit of the Commissioner of the Police 1987, to which certain New
Zealand agencies (financial institutions, casinos, lawyers, conveyancers, accountants, real
estate agents and the Racing Board) have to report financial transaction information. In
particular, they must report on ‘suspicious activities’ (where there are reasonable grounds to
suspect that a (proposed) transaction, (proposed) service or inquiry may be relevant to the
investigation or prosecution of a money laundering offence or the enforcement of certain
Acts, such as the Terrorism Suppression Act 2002 and the Proceeds of Crime Act 1991)1988

1981
     Available at: https://www.privacy.org.nz/assets/Files/Reports/October-2017-Final-Guidance-on-releasing-
personal-information-to-Police-and-law-enforcement-agencies-Principle-11f-and-ei.pdf
1982
     IPP 11(e)(i).
1983
      Available at: https://www.privacy.org.nz/assets/Files/Reports/October-2017-Final-Guidance-on-releasing-
personal-information-to-Police-and-law-enforcement-agencies-Principle-11f-and-ei.pdf.
1984
     IPP 11(f)(i).
1985
     Section 2 Privacy Act 2020.
1986
      Available at: https://www.privacy.org.nz/assets/Files/Reports/October-2017-Final-Guidance-on-releasing-
personal-information-to-Police-and-law-enforcement-agencies-Principle-11f-and-ei.pdf.
1987
      The Financial Intelligence Unit was established to implement the international recommendations for
combating money laundering and terrorist financing issued by the Financial Action Task Force.
1988
     Section 39A of the Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism Act 2009 (AML/CFT
Act). The information to be provided includes the date and time of transaction or service, the mode of
transaction, the type of funds, the amount of the transaction, the name and contact details of the persons involved
in the transaction, as well as the grounds on which the reporting entity holds the suspicion (See Schedule 1 of the
Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism (Requirements and Compliance) Amendment
Regulations 2017).

                                                       264
and ‘prescribed transactions’ (international wire transfers of at least 1 000 New Zealand
dollars and domestic large cash transactions of at least 10 000 New Zealand dollars) 1989. The
Financial Intelligence Unit may in turn transmit information that indicates grounds for
criminal investigation to the investigative branches of the New Zealand Police and other law
enforcement authorities 1990. Any information received and disclosed in this context must be
processed in accordance with the Privacy Act 2020, see also below in section 2.2.2.

         2.2.2. Further use of the information collected

The processing of personal data collected by New Zealand criminal law enforcement
authorities is subject to all requirements of the Privacy Act 2020, including with respect to
purpose limitation, lawfulness of use and provision to third parties, international transfers,
proportionality/data minimisation and storage limitation (see section 1.1). In addition, more
specific requirements follow from certain statutes.

For example, the Policing Act 2008 imposes specific conditions for the disclosure of personal
information by the Police to overseas authorities with corresponding functions and for a
corresponding purpose 1991. Such a disclosure may only take place if it is reasonably necessary
to enable the overseas authority to perform its policing function 1992. Moreover, personal
information may only be disclosed in accordance with an international disclosure instrument
(such as an international agreement or agency-to-agency agreement that must be made
publicly available) or on the basis of directions issued by the Police Commissioner and made
publicly available 1993, which describe the circumstances in which personal information may
be disclosed without a request from the corresponding overseas agency and set out any
criteria for the disclosure 1994.

As regards raw surveillance data, the Search and Surveillance Act sets out a specific retention
period, which generally lasts until the conclusion of criminal proceedings in relation to an
offence in respect of which the data was collected, or for a maximum of three years if no
criminal proceedings have commenced but the data is necessary for an ongoing
investigation 1995. Any information that may not be retained within this timeframe must be
deleted 1996.

         2.2.3. Oversight

The activities of New Zealand criminal law enforcement authorities are supervised by
different bodies.



1989
     Section 5(1) of the AML/CTF Act. The reports must contain, inter alia, a description of the transaction, the
amount of the transaction, the date on which it occurred and the parties of the transaction (Section 48B(1) of the
AML/CFT Act).
1990
     Section 142(g) of the AML/CFT Act.
1991
     Section 95B(1) of the Policing Act.
1992
     Section 95B(2) of the Policing Act.
1993
     Section 95B(3) and 95E of the Policing Act. Before entering into agency-to-agency agreements, the Police
Commissioner must consult the Privacy Commissioner, see Section 95D of the Policing Act.
1994
     Section 95C of the Policing Act.
1995
     Section 63(1) Search and Surveillance Act. This period may moreover be extended by judicial order, see
para. 2 of the same Section.
1996
     Section 64 Search and Surveillance Act.

                                                      265
Within the public sector, the Government Chief Privacy Officer (GCPO) is the central entity
for the management of personal information across the public sector. The GCPO is in charge
with setting the vision for privacy in the public sector, developing guidance, capability
building within public bodies, providing assurance to government and engagement with the
Privacy Commissioner and other stakeholders 1997. The GCPO has issued ten core expectations
describing good practices for privacy management within the public sector, supported by a
Privacy Maturity Assessment Framework to help agencies assess their own privacy capability
and identify where and how they can make improvements 1998.

In addition, independent oversight is ensured through different bodies: the OPC oversees law
enforcement agencies’ compliance with the Privacy Act 2020, while the Independent Police
Conduct Authority (IPCA) carries out general oversight of conduct, practices, policies and
procedures of the New Zealand Police 1999. The OPC and IPCA may also conduct joint
reviews. For example, in 2022, the OPC and IPCA conducted a joint inquiry into the
collection and use of photographs (biometric information) by the Police, which led to a
number of recommendations and a compliance notice from the OPC 2000.

In carrying out its oversight of criminal law enforcement authorities, the OPC can make use
of all of its powers provided under the Privacy Act 2020. This includes the possibility to
conduct general inquiries, audits (upon request of the relevant authority) and
investigations 2001 (on the basis of a complaint or on its own initiative) 2002 and to endeavour to
secure a settlement or assurance, reach findings, make recommendations and/or
determinations and issue binding access directions and compliance notices (that can be
enforced before the HRRT), as described in more detail in section 1.2.

The IPCA 2003 may investigate Police conduct/policies/procedures on the basis of a complaint
or on its own motion 2004. After conducting an investigation, the IPCA forms an opinion on

1997
        See for example the guidance issued by the GCPO, which is available at:
https://snapshot.ict.govt.nz/resources/digital-ict-archive/static/localhost_8000/guidance-and-
resources/privacy/guidance-on-privacy-management-issued-by-the-government-chief-privacy-
officer/index.html.
1998
          The       Framework         is    available       at;      https://snapshot.ict.govt.nz/resources/digital-ict-
archive/static/localhost_8000/assets/Guidance-and-Resources/Privacy-Framework-August-online.pdf.
1999
     Independent Police Conduct Authority Act 1988.
2000
     Available at: https://privacy.org.nz/publications/statements-media-releases/new-news-page-3/.
2001
     See e.g., the 2018 ex officio investigation where the OPC found that the police had unlawfully collected
personal information at a checkpoint and recommended that the data would be deleted
(https://privacy.org.nz/publications/statements-media-releases/operation-painter-findings-in-privacy-
investigation/.).
2002
     The OPC in principle has access to all relevant information, with the exception that information may not be
disclosed to the OPC where the Prime Minister certifies that the provision of the information might prejudice the
security, defence or international relations of New Zealand; or the Attorney-General certifies that the provision
of information might prejudice the prevention, investigation or detection of offences, or might involve the
disclosure of proceedings of Cabinet relating to matters of a secret or confidential nature (and the disclosure
would be injurious to the public interest), Section 88(3) Privacy Act 2020. However, this exceptional procedure
has so far never been used.
2003
     The IPCA consists of up to five members appointed by the Governor-General on the recommendation of the
House of Representatives and is chaired by a (retired) judge (Section 5 and 5A IPCA Act). It acts independently
in performing its statutory functions and duties (Section 4AB IPCA Act). Members that are judges can only be
removed under the general rules that apply to removals of judges from office or for a breach of collective duties
of the Authority, only if all of the other members are being removed for the same breach at the same time
(Section 6(1) IPCA Act and Section 42 of the Crown Entities Act 2004). Members that are not judges may only
be removed for just cause by the Governor-General acting upon an address from the House of Representatives

                                                         266
whether or not any decision, recommendation, act, omission, conduct, policy, practice, or
procedure which was the subject matter of the investigation was contrary to law,
unreasonable, unjustified, unfair or undesirable 2005. The IPCA may provide recommendations
to the Commissioner of the Police, including a recommendation that disciplinary or criminal
proceedings be considered or instituted 2006. If no adequate and proportionate action is taken in
response to its recommendations, the IPCA must send its opinion and recommendation to the
Attorney-General and the Minister of Police and may provide the Attorney-General with a
report to be presented to Parliament 2007.

         2.2.4. Redress

The New Zealand system offers different avenues to obtain redress, including compensation
for damages.

First, individuals have a right to obtain access to and correction of their data held by public
authorities under the Privacy Act 2020 (IPP 6 and 7). In limited and specific circumstances, a
law enforcement authority may refuse to grant access or correction 2008, in particular where the
disclosure of the information would be likely to pose a serious threat to the life, health, or
safety of any individual, or to public health or public safety; would be likely to prejudice the
safe custody or the rehabilitation of the individual concerned; would be likely to prejudice the
maintenance of the law, including the right to a fair trial and the prevention, investigation, and
detection of offences; or would be likely to prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand
or the international relations of the Government of New Zealand 2009. In those cases, a law
enforcement authority may also provide a reply that neither confirms nor denies that it holds
any personal information about the individual, if it is satisfied that the interest protected by
one of the exceptions would likely to be prejudiced by confirming whether or not information
is held about the individual 2010.

The restrictions to the right of access and correction foreseen by the Privacy Act 2020 cannot
be invoked in a blanket manner (e.g., with respect to all information processed by the
Police) 2011, but must always be applied on a case by case basis, to determine whether reasons


(Section 6(3) IPCA Act). Just cause includes misconduct, inability to perform the functions of office, neglect of
duty and breach of any of the collective duties of the Authority or the individual duties of members (Section 40
of the Crown Entities Act).
2004
     Section 12(1)(a)-(b) IPCA Act.
2005
     Section 27(1) IPCA Act. The IPCA in principle has full access to all relevant information (Section 24 IPCA
Act) unless the Attorney-General or Prime Minister produces a specific certification (which has so far never
happened). The Attorney-General may certify that the provision of information might prejudice the prevention,
investigation or detection of offence, or might involve the disclosure of proceedings of Cabinet relating to
matters of a secret or confidential nature (and the disclosure would be injurious to the public interest), Section
26(1)(b) IPCA Act. Similarly, the Prime Minister may certify that the provision of the information might
prejudice the security, defence or international relations of New Zealand (Section 26(1)(a) IPCA Act). In
practice, these exceptions would only be relevant when there is a covert investigation and the early disclosure of
information to the IPCA (and potentially other witnesses) might prejudice the successful conclusion of the
operation.
2006
     Section 27 of the IPCA Act.
2007
     Section 29 IPCA Act.
2008
     Section 44(2)(c) Privacy Act 2020.
2009
     Sections 49-53 Privacy Act 2020.
2010
     Section 47 Privacy Act 2020.
2011
     DHRP v. Police [2007] HRRT 34/05, para. 52.

                                                      267
for refusing access outweigh the interests of the person seeking to have access 2012. In
particular, “due consideration must be given to the competing concerns, and in the end the
outcome depends on the facts at work in the particular case” 2013. Instead of refusing access, a
public authority may also decide to grant access, but impose conditions regarding the use of
the information or its disclosure to any other person 2014. Moreover, a public authority may
make documents available to the largest extent possible in redacted form, or make the
requested information available in alternative ways, e.g., by giving the individual the
opportunity to inspect the information 2015.

If a request to obtain access or correction to data is refused, any individual has the possibility
to lodge a complaint with the OPC, who can take different measures, including binding
“access directions” (i.e., decisions ordering agencies to provide individuals with access in any
manner the OPC considers appropriate 2016), which can be challenged before the HRRT
(whose decisions can in turn be appealed before the High Court, with the Court of Appeal as a
last resort) 2017. Moreover, individuals can also enforce their right of access directly against
public authorities before the ordinary courts 2018.

Second, any individual may lodge a complaint concerning an interference with privacy by a
criminal law enforcement authority with the OPC, who can endeavour to secure a settlement
or assurance, reach findings, make recommendations and/or determinations and issue a
binding access direction or compliance notice (see section 1.2 and 2.2.4). The OPC has dealt
with several complaints against criminal law enforcement authorities, which have in certain
cases led to findings of violations of the Privacy Act, e.g., as regards the collection of
information without a warrant 2019 and the unlawful disclosure of information by the
Police 2020. Individuals may obtain judicial review of decisions of the OPC before the ordinary
courts pursuant to the Judicial Review Procedure Act 2016 (see also below) 2021. A court may
overturn a decision on the basis that it is considered to be unlawful, irrational, unreasonable or
unfair, depending on the circumstances 2022. Individuals may also initiate proceedings against a
law enforcement authority before the HRRT in different situations, e.g., if the OPC decides
not to investigate a complaint following unsuccessful settlement endeavours, does not take a
decision on a complaint during or following an investigation or does not refer it to the HRRT,
or if the Director of Human Rights Proceedings decides not to launch proceedings before the
HRRT 2023. The HRRT may order a variety of remedies, including an order restraining the
agency from continuing or repeating the violation, an order that the agency remedies the




2012
     DHRP v. Police [2007] HRRT 34/05, para. 48.
2013
     DHRP v. Police [2007] HRRT 34/05, para. 55.
2014
     Section 54 Privacy Act 2020.
2015
     Section 55-56 Privacy Act 2020.
2016
     Section 92 Privacy Act 2020.
2017
     Section 105 Privacy Act 2020.
2018
     Section 31(2) Privacy Act 2020.
2019
     Available at: https://www.privacy.org.nz/publications/statements-media-releases/statement/.
2020
     Privacy Commissioner case note 209484 [2010].
2021
     See also Mitchell v Privacy Commissioner [2017] NZAR 1706; Henderson v Privacy Commissioner [2010]
NZHC 554.
2022
     See Section 16 of the Judicial Review Procedure Act.
2023
     Section 98 Privacy Act 2020.

                                                 268
violation, damages and any other relief it considers appropriate 2024. Decisions of the HRRT
may be appealed to the higher courts 2025.

Third, any individual may lodge a complaint with the IPCA alleging any misconduct or
neglect of duty by any Police employee, or concerning any practice, policy or procedure of
the Policy affecting the person in a personal capacity 2026. Upon receiving a complaint, the
IPCA may investigate the complaint itself, refer the complaint to the Police for investigation,
oversee the investigation by the Police, or defer action until receipt of the report on the
investigation of the Police or on a criminal or disciplinary investigation 2027. The IPCA may
obtain information from such persons as it thinks fit and may hold a hearing. 2028 When
concluding an investigation, the IPCA may take the measures described earlier in section
2.2.3. For example, procedures before the IPCA initiated by complaints have led the Police to
correct information held on a complainant 2029, provide additional training to its staff2030 and
conduct disciplinary procedures 2031.

Fourth, individuals can apply to the High Court to seek judicial review of actions of a law
enforcement agency (e.g., a decision, the exercise of statutory power, requiring a person to do
something, make an investigation or inquiry, etc.) 2032. For example, an individual can
challenge the validity of a search warrant (e.g., because it was overly broad and did not
adequately describe the offences for which it was issued, or the items to be searched for 2033).
To bring a claim for judicial review, an individual must either have personal standing (i.e.,
their personal rights and interests are affected by the decision/action under challenge) or
public interest standing (i.e., there is a public interest that the claim is heard because it is
important for the court to rule on the lawfulness of the decision/action) 2034. Case law of the
New Zealand courts has confirmed that the requirement of standing in judicial review
proceedings is “significantly relaxed” and that a request will only be dismissed for lack of
standing if the claims to both personal standing and public interest standing are “so untenable
that the court must be certain they cannot possibly succeed” 2035. Standing is usually
considered in the course of a substantive procedure, which allows it to be assessed in light of


2024
     Section 102 Privacy Act 2020. In terms of damages, the HRRT may award compensation in respect of
pecuniary loss, loss of any benefit (whether or not of a monetary kind), as well as humiliation, loss of dignity and
injury to the feelings of the aggrieved individual (Section 103 Privacy Act 2020).
2025
     See Section 111 Privacy Act 2020, in conjunction with Section 123-124 of the Human Rights Act 1993.
2026
     Section 12(1) of the IPCA Act.
2027
      Section 17(1) IPCA Act. The IPCA may decide not to act upon a complaint in a limited number of
circumstances, i.e., if the complaint relates to a matter that was known for more than 12 months before the
complaint was made, or if the subject matter of the complaint is minor, the complaint is frivolous, vexatious, or
not made in good faith. The same applies if the complainant does not desire that action be taken, if the identity of
the complainant is unknown and the investigation would therefore be substantially impeded, or an adequate
remedy or appeal is available (Section 18(1) of the IPCA Act).
2028
     Section 23(3) of the IPCA Act.
2029
        https://www.ipca.govt.nz/Site/Outcomes/2021-summaries-of-facilitated-resolutions/2021-apr-20-counties-
manukau-police-update-records.aspx
2030
                https://www.ipca.govt.nz/Site/Outcomes/2018-19-summaries-of-police-investigations/2019-oct-29-
allegation-unlawful-search-wellington-police.aspx
2031
       https://www.ipca.govt.nz/Site/Outcomes/2018-19-summaries-of-police-investigations/2019-nov-11-police-
officer-sanctioned-policy-breach.aspx
2032
     Judicial Review Procedure Act 2016.
2033
     See e.g., Dotcom v Attorney-General [2014] NZSC 199; Hager v Attorney-General [2015] NZHC 3628.
2034
     See e.g., Smith (Phillip) v Attorney-General (Department of Corrections) [2017] NZHC 1647 [2].
2035
     Smith (Phillip) v Attorney-General (Department of Corrections) [2017] NZHC 1647 [2].

                                                       269
the merits of the case, which may show the public interest at issue 2036. In a judicial review
procedure, the court may find that the decision/action was unlawful (e.g., in violation of a
statute, exceeding the discretion provided to the public authority, etc.), unreasonable (e.g.,
because it is arbitrary) or procedurally improper 2037. The court may order different remedies,
e.g., referring the decision back to the relevant authority, prohibiting future actions, setting the
decision/action aside, declaring the action/decision unlawful or issuing an injunction 2038.

Fifth, depending on the type of remedies sought, individuals may invoke a violation of
Section 21 of the Bill of Rights Act in different procedures to obtain redress. For example,
individuals can invoke Section 21 of the Bill of Rights Act in the course of judicial review
proceedings to have a decision/action (e.g., a warrant) quashed. In addition, individuals may
bring a civil claim for public law damages, alleging a violation of Section 21 of the Bill of
Rights Act 2039. To determine whether such compensation is an effective and proportionate
remedy, the court must examine the nature of the right and the nature of the breach. In
addition, any awarded sum must reflect any relevant intention behind the conduct, the
duration of the breach and the ways in which the state has acknowledged the wrongdoing2040.
Moreover, if criminal proceedings are instituted against the individual, Section 21 of the Bill
of Rights Act can be invoked to challenge the admissibility of evidence if it was unlawfully
obtained 2041.

Finally, under certain conditions, individuals could claim compensation for damages under
the tort of publication of private facts (i.e., if a public authority publishes facts for which the
individual had a reasonable expectation of privacy, and the publication is highly offensive to a
reasonable person 2042) and intrusion into seclusion (i.e., in case of an intentional and
unauthorised intrusion into an intimate personal activity or space, involving infringement of a
reasonable expectation of privacy, in circumstances which are highly offensive to a
reasonable person 2043).

       2.3. Access and use by New Zealand public authorities for national security purposes

There are two intelligence and security agencies in New Zealand, the Government
Communications Security Bureau (GCSB) and the New Zealand Security Intelligence Service
(NZSIS). The GCSB specialises in signals intelligence, information assurance and
cybersecurity 2044, whereas the NZSIS specialises in human intelligence activities 2045. Both
agencies may access personal information on the basis of the Intelligence and Security Act of
2017 (I&S Act), subject to specific limitations and safeguards. The objective of the I&S Act,
which was the result of a significant reform in 2017 of the rules applicable to intelligence
activities, is inter alia to ensure that the functions of the intelligence and security agencies are

2036
     Ibid.
2037
     See e.g., Stevenson v Office of Police Commissioner [2015] NZHC 1408 at [6].
2038
     Section 16 of the Judicial Review Procedure Act.
2039
     Simpson v Attorney General [1994] 3 NZLR 667 (NZCA).
2040
     Taunoa v Attorney General [2008] 1 NZLE 429 (NZ Supreme Court).
2041
     See Section 30 of the Evidence Act 2006. See also R v Hamed [2011] NZSC 101; R v Reti and Wood [2020]
NZSC 16; Griffith v R [2016] NZCA 390.
2042
     Hosking v Runting [2005] 1 NZLR 1 (CA).
2043
     C v Holland [2012] NZHC 2155 [2012] 3 NZLR 672.
2044
     Section 8 I&S Act.
2045
     Section 7 I&S Act.

                                                   270
performed in accordance with New Zealand law and human rights and in a manner that
facilitates effective democratic and institutional oversight 2046).

         2.3.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

As a general principle, the I&S Act stipulates that, when performing their functions, the
intelligence agencies must act (1) in accordance with New Zealand law and all human rights
obligations recognised by New Zealand; (2) independently and impartially in the performance
of their operational functions; (3) with integrity and professionalism and (4) in a manner that
facilitates effective democratic oversight 2047. The Directors-General of the two intelligence
and security agencies must take all reasonable steps to ensure that the agencies’ activities are
limited to those that are relevant to the performance of their functions, kept free from any
influence or consideration that is not relevant to the performance of their functions and
politically neutral 2048. Moreover, any cooperation with foreign jurisdictions and international
organisations must take place in accordance with New Zealand law, including human rights
obligations 2049.

In June 2023 (after a previous version in 2021), 14 national security priorities were approved
by the government, which direct the intelligence and security agencies’ collection of
information 2050. These priorities include, for instance, foreign interference and espionage,
malicious cyber activity, national security implications of climate change, national security
implications of disinformation, terrorism and violent extremism, transnational serious and
organised crime, and economic security. On the basis of the I&S Act, the two intelligence and
security agencies may make use of different powers to collect personal information to pursue
these priorities.

First, an ‘intelligence warrant’ may authorise different activities, such as human intelligence,
surveillance 2051, the interception of private communications 2052 and searches and seizures 2053.
The I&S Act foresees a ‘Type 1’ warrant issued by the responsible Minister and the Chief
Commissioner of Intelligence Warrants 2054 (for the collection of information on New Zealand
citizens or permanent residents) and a ‘Type 2’ warrant issued by the responsible Minister
(for the collection of information on non-New Zealand nationals or residents) intelligence

2046
     Section 3 of the I&S Act. As described in section 2.1, one of the reforms brought by the Intelligence and
Security Act was the amendment of the Privacy Act to expand the IPPs that apply to the intelligence and security
agencies.
2047
     Section 17 I&S Act.
2048
     Section 18(a) I&S Act.
2049
     Section 18(b) I&S Act.
2050
      Available at: https://www.dpmc.govt.nz/our-programmes/national-security/national-security-intelligence-
priorities#:~:text=that%20could%20impact-
,New%20Zealand’s%20national%20security%20interests.,that%20affect%20our%20national%20interest.
2051
     This includes both visual surveillance and electronic tracking of one or more (classes of) persons, places or
things (Section 47 I&S Act).
2052
     Interception includes “to hear, listen to, record, monitor, acquire or receive the communication, or acquire its
substance, meaning or sense, while it is taking place or in the course of transmission” (Section 47 I&S Act).
‘Communication’ is broadly defined and covers signs, signals, writing, images, sounds, information, etc.
(Section 47 I&S Act).
2053
     Section 67 I&S Act.
2054
     Pursuant to the I&S Act, the Governor-General must, on the recommendation of the Prime Minister after
consultation of the leader of the opposition, appoint up to three persons as Commissioners of Intelligence
Warrants. A person may only be appointed a commissioner if (s)he has previously held office as a Judge of the
High Court. See Sections 112-113 I&S Act.

                                                        271
warrant 2055. An application for an intelligence warrant (Type 1 and Type 2) must be made in
writing by the Director-General of the relevant agency and set out, inter alia, the details of the
activity proposed to be carried out and the grounds on which the application is made
(including the reasons why the legal requirements for issuing the warrant are believed to be
satisfied) 2056.

A Type 1 intelligence warrant may be issued if it will enable the intelligence and security
agency to carry out an activity that (1) is necessary to contribute to the protection of national
security and identifies, enables the assessment of, or protects against certain harms listed in
the I&S Act (e.g., terrorism or violent extremism, espionage, proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction), or (2) will contribute to he international relations and well-being of New
Zealand, or the economic well-being of New Zealand and there are reasonable grounds to
suspect that the targeted individual is acting on behalf of a foreign person, organisation or
terrorist entity 2057. A Type 2 intelligence warrant may only be issued if the authorising
Minister is satisfied that the warrant will enable the intelligence agency to carry out an
activity that is necessary to contribute to the protection of national security; or will contribute
to the international relations and well-being of New Zealand, or the economic well-being of
New Zealand (i.e., an activity that is necessary to pursue the government’s national security
priorities, as described above) 2058.

In addition to the abovementioned criteria, Type 1 and Type 2 warrants may only be issued if
(1) the activity is “necessary to enable the agency to carry out its functions”; (2) the activity is
“proportionate to the purpose for which it is to be carried out”; (3) the purpose of the warrant
“cannot be reasonably be achieved by less intrusive means” and (4) arrangements are in place
to ensure that nothing will be done in reliance on the warrant beyond what is necessary and
reasonable to perform the agency’s function, all reasonably practicable steps will be taken to
minimise the impact on any members of the public and any information obtained in reliance
on the warrant will be retained, used and disclosed only in accordance with the law2059.
According to the Inspector General of Intelligence and Security, the key concepts in this
assessment are the principles of ‘necessity’ (i.e., “more than useful, reasonable or desirable,
although not necessarily indispensable” – requiring a law enforcement authority “to make a
compelling case” for the use of its powers) and ‘proportionality’ (which requires weighing
different factors, such as the gravity of any adverse effects, the importance of the purpose, the
anticipated benefits to be gained, the likelihood of success, any alternative ways to achieve
the result sought, and any measures that can be taken to mitigate adverse effects) 2060.

Type 1 and Type 2 warrants must specify, among other information, the objective and
purpose of the warrant, as well as the person or class of persons (e.g., a terrorist cell) that will
be subject to the activity 2061. The validity of an intelligence warrant may not exceed 12

2055
     Sections 52-55 I&S Act.
2056
     Section 55 I&S Act.
2057
     Sections 58-59 I&S Act.
2058
     Section 60 I&S Act.
2059
     Section 61 I&S Act.
2060
     See the report of the Inspector General of Intelligence and Security of December 2018 on “Warrants issued
under the Intelligence and Security Act 2017”, paras. 39-41.
2061
     Section 66 I&S Act. As specified by the Inspector General, “a warrant can authorise activities against a
named person or persons, or against a defined class of persons. The same applies to places, things and

                                                    272
months and may at any time be revoked by the responsible Minister, who may in that case
require that all information collected under that warrant is destroyed 2062.

In situations of urgency, the authorising Minister (and, for Type 1 warrants, a Commissioner
of Intelligence Warrants) may allow the application for a warrant to be done orally and issue
the warrant subsequently in accordance with the abovementioned criteria 2063. Such a warrant
is revoked by law 48 hours after its issue unless, before the expiry of that period, the applicant
applies in writing for a warrant in accordance with the previously described procedure 2064.
Upon receiving such an application, the responsible Minister (and, for Type 1 warrants, a
Commissioner for Intelligence Warrants) may either confirm or revoke the warrant 2065. If
revoked, all information obtained under that warrant must be destroyed as soon as
practicable 2066. In addition, in very urgent situations – i.e., only if the delay in making an
application for an urgent issue of a warrant would defeat the purpose of obtaining the warrant
– the Director-General of an intelligence agency may authorise an activity on the basis of the
abovementioned criteria 2067. In this case, the relevant Minister (and, for Type 1 warrants, the
Chief Commissioner of Intelligence Warrants) must be notified and an application for a
warrant must be filed within 24 hours after the authorisation is given (otherwise the warrant is
revoked, and all collected information must be destroyed) 2068. Moreover, the reasons for the
urgent issue of a warrant must be recorded and all urgent warrants must be sent to the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security for review 2069.

More generally, any unauthorised information that has been collected must be destroyed
immediately after it is obtained, unless an application for a warrant is made as soon as
practicable and a warrant is issued2070. Incidentally obtained information may only be retained
for the purpose of disclosing it to the Police, the New Zealand Defence Force or another
public authority (in New Zealand or overseas) if there are reasonable grounds to believe that
such a disclosure may assist in (1) preventing or detecting serious crime; (2) preventing or
responding to threats to the life of any person; (3) identifying, preventing or responding to
threats or potential threats to security or defence or (4) preventing the death of any person
who is outside the territorial jurisdiction of any country 2071. In addition, the Director General
of an intelligence and security agency must keep a register of intelligence warrants that were
issued to them, which may be accessed at any time by the responsible Minister as well as the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (see below), and the Chief Commissioner of


communications, which can be specified individually (e.g., searching a particular place) or as classes (e.g.,
searching any place owned, used or occupied by a targeted person)”, see para. 23 of the report “Warrants issued
under the Intelligence and Security Act 2017”.
2062
     Section 64-65, Section 84(2) I&S Act.
2063
     Section 72 I&S Act. For Type 1 warrants, the authorising Minister may, if it is necessary to do so without the
involvement of a Commissioner of Intelligence Warrants, alone allow an oral application and urgently issue the
warrant. In this case, the Chief Commissioner of Intelligence Warrants must immediately be notified and may, at
any time, revoke the warrant. See Section 71 I&S Act.
2064
     Section 74(1) and 75(1) I&S Act.
2065
     Article 74(2) and 75(2) I&S Act.
2066
     Section 76 I&S Act.
2067
     Section 78(1), (2)(b), (4) I&S Act.
2068
     Section 79, 80 and 81 I&S Act.
2069
     Sections 73, 77 and 82 I&S Act.
2070
     Section 102(2) I&S Act.
2071
     Section 104 I&S Act.

                                                       273
Intelligence Warrants, in relation to Type 1 intelligence warrants 2072. Violations of several
requirements with respect to intelligence warrants (e.g., failure to destroy information,
unlawful use or disclosure of collected information, providing false or misleading information
when applying for a warrant) are subject to criminal sanctions 2073.

Second, the intelligence and security agencies may have access to business records of
telecommunication network operators 2074 and financial service providers 2075, after obtaining
approval 2076 from the responsible Minister and the Chief Commissioner of Intelligence
Warrants 2077. Such approval is only granted if the Minister and Commissioner are satisfied
that (1) obtaining business records is necessary to enable the carrying out of a function of the
intelligence agency; (2) the privacy impact does not outweigh the importance of performing
that function; (3) it would not be more appropriate to apply for an intelligence warrant; (4)
there are satisfactory arrangements in place to ensure that nothing will be done beyond what is
necessary and reasonable for the proper performance of a function of the agency and (5) there
are satisfactory arrangements in place to ensure that obtained information will be retained,
used and disclosed only in accordance with the law 2078. The approval must state, inter alia, the
circumstances in which the business records may be accessed, the business records that may
be accessed, and any restrictions or conditions 2079. An approval expires 6 months after the
date on which it is granted and may be extended upon application for a subsequent
approval 2080. The Director-General of an intelligence and security agency must keep a register
of all business records directions that received the approval referred to above 2081. All business
records obtained under a business records direction must be destroyed as soon as practicable


2072
     Section 83 I&S Act.
2073
     Sections 106-111 I&S Act.
2074
     With respect to telecommunication network operators, the notion of ‘business records’ includes customer
and subscriber information, bank account number details, credit card number details, IP addresses, call
associated data, device-related information, details of mobile data usage, information on linked accounts, and
details of any persons communicating with the network operator (Section 144 I&S Act). It does not include the
content of telecommunications and web browsing history (Section 144 I&S Act). It also does not cover personal
information about the network operator’s employees and directors, as well as any information relating to the
business operations of the operator and the content of any other communications or files held by the operator in
providing any service to a customer (e.g., cloud storage servers or insurance).
2075
     In relation to financial service providers, ‘business records’ include customer information, bank account
number details, credit card number details, statement and account information, transaction information and other
information related to a specific account (Section 144 I&S Act). It does not include the content of
communications, personal information about the provider’s employees and directors, information relating to the
business operations of the provider or the content of any other communications or files held by the provider in
providing any service to a customer.
2076
     Approval must be requested by the Director-General of an intelligence and security agency, through a
written application to the responsible Minister and the Chief Commissioner of Intelligence Warrants that
includes the circumstances giving rise to the need for the application, the business records or class of business
records sought, the function that the intelligence and security agency would be performing and an explanation as
to why applying for an intelligence warrant is likely to be impractical or otherwise inappropriate in the
circumstance in the case (Section 145(3) I&S Act). The function of the intelligence agency must be either
intelligence collection and analysis (Section 10 I&S Act), protective security services, advice and assistance
(Section 11 I&S Act) or cooperation with other entities to respond to imminent threat (Section 14 I&S Act).
2077
     Section 145 I&S Act. Under Part 4, Subpart 6 I&S Act, the Governor-General must, on the recommendation
of the Prime Minister, appoint up to three Commissioners of Intelligence Warrants. A person may be appointed
as Commissioner only if he/she has previously held office as a Judge of the High Court.
2078
     Section 147(2) I&S Act.
2079
     Section 147(3) I&S Act.
2080
     Section 148 I&S Act.
2081
     Section 153 I&S Act.

                                                      274
if they are not required or are no longer required for the performance of the agency's
functions 2082.

Third, intelligence agencies may have access to specific categories of information (e.g., birth
information, citizenship information) held in certain government databases 2083, in accordance
with a written agreement between the responsible Ministers 2084. Such a ‘direct access
agreement’ may only be concluded if the relevant Ministers are satisfied that (1) direct access
is necessary to enable the intelligence agency to perform its duties; (2) there are adequate
safeguards to protect the privacy of individuals (existing agreements e.g., contain provisions
on data security, access controls, data retention and data sharing); and (3) the agreement will
include appropriate procedures for direct access, use, disclosure and retention of the
information 2085. Both the OPC and the Inspector-General (see below) must be consulted
before concluding an agreement and the relevant Ministers have to take into account any
comments received in this respect 2086. A direct access agreement must specify, inter alia, the
database and particular information that may be accessed, the function/duty/power to be
exercised by the intelligence agency, the safeguards to be applied to particular categories of
information (e.g., commercially sensitive information), requirements relating to storage,
retention and disposal of information, etc. 2087 All agreements must be published on the
website of both the intelligence agency and the public authority holding the database2088.
Finally, the relevant Ministers must review the agreement every three years, in consultation
with the OPC and Inspector-General 2089. So far, two direct access agreements have been
concluded: between the Minister responsible for the NZSIS and the Minister of Customs and
between the Minister responsible for the NZSIS and the Minister of Immigration 2090.




2082
     Section 152 I&S Act.
2083
     In addition, the I&S Act provides the intelligence agencies with a legal basis to collect four types of so-called
‘restricted information’, i.e. (1) information maintained by Inland Revenue under the Tax Administration Act
1994; (2) information relating to a national student number to students enrolled with a tertiary education
provider; (3) information relating to an adoption held by the Registrar-General; and (4) photographic images
used for driver licences (Sections 135 and 136 I&S Act). To access such information in relation to a non-New
Zealand citizen or permanent resident, the Director-General of an intelligence agency must obtain permission
from the responsible Minister (Section 136(1) and (2)(b) I&S Act). Permission may be granted if the Minister is
satisfied that (1) access to the information is necessary to contribute to the protection of national security or will
contribute to the international relations and well-being of New Zealand; or the economic well-being of New
Zealand; (2) the access is necessary for the purpose of enabling the intelligence agency to perform its functions
(i.e. intelligence collection and analysis and protective security services, advice and assistance, (3) the privacy
impact is proportionate to that purpose and the information cannot be collected by any other means (Section 138
and 139 I&S Act in conjunction with ss 10 and 11). The Ministerial permission must specify the information that
may be accessed and the agencies holding the restricted information are required to comply with the permission
and provide access (Section 140 and 141 I&S Act).
2084
      Section 125 I&S Act. The intelligence agencies that may access the database on the basis of such
agreements, the information that may be accessed, as well as the authority in charge of the database are specified
in the Intelligence and Security Act (Schedule 2 I&S Act).
2085
     Section 126 I&S Act.
2086
     Section 127 I&S Act.
2087
     Section 129 I&S Act.
2088
     Section 131(1)-(2) I&S Act.
2089
     Section 131(3) I&S Act.
2090
     Available at: https://www.nzsis.govt.nz/assets/NZSIS-Documents/DAA/Direct-Access-Agreement-Customs-
NZSIS.pdf and https://www.nzsis.govt.nz/assets/NZSIS-Documents/DAA/Direct-Access-Agreement-NZSIS-
DIA-BDM-database.pdf.

                                                        275
Finally, the NZSIS and GCSB may obtain personal information from any public or private
sector agency on a voluntary basis 2091. In particular, the Privacy Act 2020 allows the
disclosure of information (either upon request or on their own initiative) if a private entity or
public authority believes on reasonable grounds that the disclosure of the information is
necessary to enable an intelligence and security agency to perform any of its functions2092.
The Director-General of an intelligence and security agency may request information if he/she
believes on reasonable grounds that the information is necessary to enable the agency to
perform any of its functions 2093. Such a request must provide the details of the requested
information and confirm that it is necessary for the agency to carry out its functions 2094. To
enable agencies to decide whether or not to disclose information upon request, the Director-
General of an intelligence and security agency may certify that he or she believes that the
relevant requirements are met 2095. A Ministerial Policy Statement provides further guidance
as to the elements to be taken into account by intelligence and security agencies when making
requests for voluntary disclosure. In particular, they must consider the legality, necessity and
proportionality of each request, must take reasonable steps to mitigate the impact on privacy,
consider less intrusive means and, in, general, ensure that they make use of the most
appropriate statutory mechanism to access personal information 2096. Intelligence agencies
must keep registers of all certificates they have issued, which may be accessed any time by
the responsible Minister, as well as the Inspector-General 2097.

        2.3.2. Further use of the information collected

The processing of personal data by the two intelligence and security agencies is subject to
most provisions of the Privacy Act 2020, including the Principles governing the use and
disclosure of information, security, purpose limitation, data accuracy and limited data
retention 2098.

With respect to the further sharing of data with other entities, the I&S Act also imposes
specific limitations. In particular, it only allows the intelligence and security agencies to share
collected information with the Chief Executive of the Department of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet, or other persons (whether in New Zealand or overseas) when authorised to do so by
the responsible Minister 2099. The Minister may only authorise a disclosure if he/she is
satisfied that it would take place in accordance with New Zealand law and human rights
obligations 2100. A Ministerial Policy Statement on Cooperation with Overseas Public
Authorities provides further guidance to intelligence agencies in this respect. For example, it
requires them to comply with the following principles: legality, compliance with human rights
obligations, necessity, reasonableness and proportionality, information management, and


2091
     Subpart 1 of Part 5 I&S Act.
2092
     IPP 11(1)(g) Privacy Act 2020. See also Sections 120(b) and 122 I&S Act.
2093
     Section 121(1) I&S Act.
2094
     Section 121(2) I&S Act.
2095
     Section 122(3) I&S Act.
2096
        See https://www.nzic.govt.nz/assets/assets/mpss/Ministerial-Policy-Statement-Requesting-information-
under-section-121.pdf.
2097
     Section 123 I&S Act.
2098
     Section 28 Privacy Act 2020.
2099
     Section 10(1)(b) I&S Act.
2100
     Section 10(3) I&S Act.

                                                    276
oversight 2101. In accordance with the I&S Act, all intelligence and security agency employees
are required to have regard to any relevant Ministerial Policy Statement in making any
decision or taking any action 2102.

        2.3.3. Oversight

The activities of the NZSIS and GCSB are supervised by different bodies.

First, the OPC independently oversees compliance of data processing by the NZSIS and
GCSB with the Privacy Act 2020. In doing so, the OPC may make use of different powers,
including to conduct general inquiries, audits (upon request) and investigations (see also
section 2.2.3) 2103. If, after completing an investigation, the OPC concludes that an action of an
intelligence and security agency is an interference with the privacy of an individual, the OPC
must issue a report setting out its opinions and reasons for that opinion. 2104 The report may
include any recommendations the OPC considers appropriate and may request the intelligence
and security agency to notify the OPC within a specified time of any steps the agency
proposes to take in response 2105. If the intelligence and security agency does not take steps in
response to a report that the OPC considers to be adequate and appropriate within a
reasonable time, the OPC may send a copy of the report to the Prime Minister, who in turn
may present the report to the Parliament 2106. In addition, the OPC may issue a binding
compliance notice 2107, which may be enforced before the HRRT in accordance with the
procedure described above (see section 1.2 and 2.2.3).

Second, independent oversight is also provided by the Inspector-General of Intelligence and
Security 2108. The Inspector-General carries out regular reviews (at least every 12 months) of
procedures and compliance systems of each intelligence and agency and conducts inquiries
into specific activities upon request from other authorities (e.g., the responsible Minister or
the Prime Minister) or on its own initiative 2109. For example, in 2021 2110, the Inspector-
General initiated reviews of the NZSIS information sharing with the Police and the GCSB’s
raw data sharing with partner agencies, and in 2020 2111, of the GCSB’s access to information
infrastructures. In carrying out its oversight activities, the Inspector-General may require any
person to provide any information the Inspector-General considers may be relevant to an
inquiry. 2112. On the completion of an inquiry, the Inspector-General must prepare a written

2101
      See https://www.nzic.govt.nz/assets/assets/mpss/Ministerial-Policy-Statement-Cooperation-with-overseas-
public-authorities.pdf.
2102
     Section 209 I&S Act
2103
     The OPC in principle has access to all relevant information, with the exception that information may not be
disclosed to the OPC where the Prime Minister certifies that the provision of the information might prejudice the
security, defence or international relations of New Zealand (Section 88(3) Privacy Act 2020). However, this
exceptional procedure has so far never been used.
2104
     Section 95(2) Privacy Act 2020.
2105
     Section 95(3)-(4) Privacy Act 2020.
2106
     Section 95(5)-(6) Privacy Act 2020.
2107
     Subpart 2 of Part 6 of the Privacy Act 2020.
2108
      Subpart 1 of Part 6 I&S Act. The Inspector-General is appointed by the Governor-General on the
recommendation of the House of Representatives and after consulting the Intelligence and Security Committee
(Section 157 I&S Act).
2109
     Section 158(1) I&S Act.
2110
     Available at: https://igis.govt.nz/assets/Annual-Reports/Annual-Report-2021-2022.pdf.
2111
     Available at: https://igis.govt.nz/assets/ANNUAL-REPORT-2020-2021.pdf.
2112
     Section 179 I&S Act.

                                                      277
report containing his or her conclusions and recommendations 2113. Reports by the Inspector-
General must be sent to the responsible Minister and Director-General of the intelligence and
security agency to which the inquiry relates, as well as to either the Prime Minister or the
Intelligence and Security Committee if the inquiry was requested by either of the latter. If the
inquiry was carried out at the request of a Minister or the Prime Minister, or on the Inspector-
General’s own initiative, the Inspector-General may send the report to the Intelligence and
Security Committee if the responsible Minister/the Prime Minister agrees 2114. In addition, the
Inspector-General must make reports publicly available 2115. The responsible Minister must
respond to a report of the Inspector-General as soon as practicable after receiving a report 2116.

Finally, the Intelligence and Security Committee of the New Zealand Parliament examines the
policy, administration and expenditure of each intelligence and security agency, considers
their annual reports and conducts annual reviews on that basis, and considers any Bill, petition
or other matter relating to the intelligence and security agencies referred to the Committee by
the House of Representatives 2117. The Committee consists of the Prime Minister, the Leader
of the Opposition, members of the House of Representatives nominated by the Prime Minister
as well as members nominated by the Leader of the Opposition with the agreement of the
Prime Minister 2118. While the Committee does not itself have the power to inquire into
matters falling within the jurisdiction of the Inspector-General, it may request the Inspector-
General to conduct an inquiry into any matter relating to intelligence and security agencies'
compliance with New Zealand law (including human rights law) and the propriety of
particular activities of an intelligence and security agency 2119. The Committee itself does not
have the function to inquire into any matter within the jurisdiction of the Inspector-General,
into any information that is operationally sensitive or into complaints from individuals 2120.

         2.3.4. Redress

The New Zealand system offers different avenues to obtain redress, including compensation
for damages.

First, individuals have a right to obtain access to and correction of their data held by the
NZSIS and GCSB under the Privacy Act 2020, under the same conditions as described under
section 2.2.4. If a request to obtain access or correction to data is refused, any individual has
the possibility to lodge a complaint with the OPC 2121, that can issue a report with

2113
     Section 185(1) I&S Act.
2114
     Section 185 I&S Act.
2115
     Section 188 I&S Act. At the same time, the public report may not contain information that, if publicly
disclosed, would be likely to prejudice the entrusting of information to the Government of New Zealand on a
confidential basis by a third country or international organisation. The same applies to information that would be
likely to endanger the safety of any person, would prejudice the continued performance of functions of an
intelligence agency or the security, defence or international relations of New Zealand, or reveal the identity of
officers or employees of intelligence agencies, see Section 188(2) I&S Act.
2116
     Section 187 I&S Act.
2117
     Section 193 I&S Act.
2118
     Section 194(2) I&S Act.
2119
     Section 193(1)(e) I&S Act.
2120
     Section 193(2) I&S Act.
2121
     For example, in one case, the OPC investigated a refusal to grant access by the NZSIS and the GCSB, which
had argued that responding to the request would likely prejudice the security or defence of New Zealand. In this
case, the OPC accepted that both the NZSIS and the GCSB did have reasons to neither confirm nor deny the
existence or non-existence of the information. See Case note 284416 [2017] NZ PrivCmr 5.

                                                      278
recommendations, that may also contain a request to notify the OPC within a specified time of
any steps the intelligence agency proposes to take in response to the recommendations 2122. If
an intelligence agency does not take steps that the OPC considers to be adequate and
appropriate in response to a report of the OPC within a reasonable time, the OPC can send a
copy of the report to the Prime Minister, who may in turn present the report to the House of
Representatives 2123. Moreover, individuals can also enforce their right of access directly
against public authorities before the ordinary courts 2124.

Second, any individual may lodge a complaint concerning an interference with privacy by an
intelligence agency with the OPC, who can issue recommendations 2125 and binding
compliance notices which may be enforced before the HRRT in accordance with the
procedure described above (see section 1.2 and 2.2.4).

Finally, the same judicial avenues as the ones described in section 2.2.4 (i.e., to obtain judicial
review of decisions/actions of intelligence agencies, exclude illegally obtained evidence from
judicial proceedings and/or obtain compensation for damages, including by invoking a
violation of Section 21 of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act) are also available against the
NZSIS and GCSB 2126.




2122
     Section 95(2)-(4) Privacy Act 2020.
2123
     Section 95(5)(6) Privacy Act 2020.
2124
     Section 31(2) Privacy Act 2020. See also Dotcom v USA and District Court of North Shore [2014] NZHC
2550 [56], [69], [84].
2125
     If the intelligence agency does not take steps that the OPC considers to be adequate and appropriate in
response to a report of the OPC within a reasonable time, the OPC can send a copy of the report to the Prime
Minister, who may in turn present the report to the House of Representatives (Section 95(5)(6) Privacy Act
2020).
2126
     See e.g., Dotcom v. Attorney-General [2012] NZHC 3268, and Attorney-General v Dotcom [2013] NZCA
43,
 in which an individual sought damages for breach of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act, in respect of GCSB’s
unlawful interception of that individual’s communications. In that case, GCSB admitted liability and the High
Court entered judgment against it: see Dotcom v Attorney-General [2019] NZCA 412 at [3].

                                                    279
                                            X. SWITZERLAND

1.        RULES APPLYING TO THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA

       1.1. Relevant developments in the data protection framework of Switzerland

On 26 July 2000, the Commission adopted the adequacy decision 2127 for Switzerland,
following an opinion of the Article 29 Working Party of 7 June 1999 2128. At the time of the
adoption of the adequacy decision, the protection of personal data in Switzerland was mainly
governed by the Federal Act on Data Protection of 19 June 1992 (FADP 1992) 2129 and its
implementing Data Protection Ordinance of 14 June 1993 (DPO 1993) 2130.

Since then, there have been a number of significant developments in the Swiss data protection
framework that created a higher level of convergence with the EU one. More specifically, in
order to implement the data protection requirements of Convention 108 of the Council of
Europe 2131 and the Schengen acquis, the FADP was subject to revisions in 2006 2132 and
2010 2133. On 25 September 2020, the Federal Assembly adopted a new Federal Act on Data
Protection (FADP 2020) to replace the Act from 1992 2134. The FADP entered into force on 1
September 2023. It takes into account the revised Convention 108 of the Council of Europe
(Convention 108+), ratified by Switzerland on 7 September 2023, and Regulation (EU)
2016/679 (GDPR) 2135. The FADP 2020 also incorporates the content of the previous Swiss
Schengen Data Protection Act 2136, thereby implementing Directive (EU) 2016/680 (Law
Enforcement Directive) 2137 with respect to data processing in the context of Schengen
cooperation in criminal matters. The FADP 2020 is complemented by a new Data Protection
Ordinance (DPO 2022), which was adopted by the Federal Council on 31 August 2022 and

2127
     Commission Decision 2000/518/EC of 26 July 2000 on the adequate protection of personal data
provided in Switzerland, OJ L 215, 25/08/2000 p. 1.
2128
      Opinion No 5/99 on the level of protection of personal data in Switzerland, available at
https://ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-recommendation/files/1999/wp22_en.pdf.
2129
     Federal Act on Data Protection of 19 June 1992 .
2130
     Ordinance to the Federal Act on Data Protection of 14 June 1993.
2131
     Switzerland ratified Convention 108 on 2 October 1997, and its Additional Protocol 181 on 20 December
2007.
2132
     Federal Act of 24 March 2006 (Official Compilation 2007 4983). As part of this amendment, the FADP was
strengthened in several ways. For example, the requirements for valid consent were updated, by making clear
that consent must be a free expression of the individual’s will concerning one or more processing activities after
having been duly informed (Article 4(5) FADP 1992); a general principle of transparency and obligations to
proactively inform individuals about the processing of their data in certain situations were introduced (Articles 4,
14 and 18 FADP 1992); a specific obligation for controllers to adopt measures to ensure that inaccurate or
incomplete data is corrected was added (Article 5(1) FDAP 1992); a modernised regime for international data
transfers was put in place (Article 6 FADP 1992); and specific rules governing the relationship between
controllers and service providers were included (Article 10a FADP 1992).
2133
     Federal Acts of 19 March 2010 (Official Compilation 2010 33387). This amendment in particular updated
the transparency requirements and the right of individuals to obtain access to their data, as well as the possible
restrictions to those provisions (Article 9 FADP 1992).
2134
     Federal Act on Data Protection of 25 September 2020.
2135
     Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).
2136
     Schengen Data Protection Act of 28 September 2018.
2137
     Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of the
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties,
and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Council Framework Decision 2008/977/JHA.

                                                       280
also entered into force on 1 September 2023. As explained in more detailed below, the FADP
2020 has strengthened the Swiss data protection framework in several areas.

The FADP 2020, like the previous legal framework, has a broad scope of application 2138,
applying to all private operators and federal public authorities. Cantonal and communal public
bodies are subject to cantonal data protection rules, which must meet Federal Constitutional
requirements 2139 and Switzerland’s international commitments in the area of data protection.
In particular, according to Article 35 of the Federal Constitution, fundamental rights
(including the right to privacy and data protection) are directly applicable in the entire Swiss
legal system and have to be respected by all state organs and public bodies, at federal,
cantonal and communal level. In line with Articles 13 and 36 of the Federal Constitution, any
restriction to the fundamental right to privacy must have a legal basis, must be justified by a
public interest or the protection of the fundamental rights of others and must be proportionate,
while the essence of the right is inviolable. In addition, cantonal law must be in line with
international conventions or treaties concluded by Switzerland, including Convention 108, its
additional Protocol 181, and, in the future, Convention 108+, which are directly binding for
the cantons 2140. Individuals can appeal up to the Federal Supreme Court if they consider
cantonal law to infringe federal constitutional or international rules 2141. Reflecting these
principles, all 26 cantons have data protection laws providing general data protection
principles, rights for individuals and oversight by independent cantonal supervisory
authorities. Several cantons recently enacted data protection reforms similar to the 2020
reform at federal level 2142.




2138
     Article 2 FADP 2020. The law does not apply to personal data processed by a natural person exclusively for
personal use, the deliberations of the Federal Assembly, court proceedings, and personal data processed by
institutional beneficiaries to whom the immunity of jurisdiction in Switzerland applies. Public registers for
private legal transactions (the electronic civil status register, the Central Business Name Index, the aircraft
register of the Federal Office of Civil Aviation and the registers of the Swiss Federal Institute of Intellectual
Property), and in particular access to such registers and data subject rights, are regulated by specific laws (see
e.g., Article 43a of the Swiss Civil Code and the Ordinance on the Civil Status, which lays down specific
modalities for individuals to obtain access to their data in the register, and contains specific provisions on data
security). To the extent that such laws do not contain data protection provisions, the FADP 2020 continues to
apply. .
2139
     See Articles 49-51 Federal Constitution, which provide that federal law takes precedence over any contrary
law of a canton and requires cantons to adopt their own democratic constitutions that must be compatible with
federal law. See also the case law of the Federal Supreme Court regarding the ‘principle of supremacy of federal
law’ (e.g., ATF 143 I 272, 276 seq., ATF 131 I 394, 396 seq.).
2140
     See Article 54 Federal Constitution, which establishes the exclusive powers of the Confederation in foreign
affairs. Consequently, international treaties concluded by the Confederation are also binding for the cantons
which must implement them in their areas of competence.
2141
     For example, in a recent case about facial recognition by the police the Swiss Federal Supreme Court judged
that the cantonal legal basis for a system of automated vehicle search and monitoring traffic surveillance using
facial recognition by the police was not sufficiently precise in light of Article 13 of the Federal Constitution.
According to the Court, the purpose of processing, the extent of processing, as well as the duration of
conservation and the erasure must be sufficiently determined in the law (ATF 146 I 116B_908/2018).
2142
     The data protection reforms at cantonal level aim at implementing the relevant international obligations in
the field of data protection (Convention 108+ and the Law Enforcement Directive) and at taking into account the
FADP 2020. As of November 2023, 14 cantons have new or revised data protection laws (AG, AI, BL, GL, JU,
LU, NE, SG, SH, SZ, ZG, ZH, BS); one canton (GR) declares the provisions of the FADP 2020 applicable for
cantonal authorities (while it is in parallel developing a new cantonal data protection law); in the other cantons
drafts of revised data protection laws are either currently deliberated in parliament or have been submitted to
public consultation.

                                                       281
While the core definitions (e.g., of ‘personal data’ and ‘processing’) have remained the same,
the FADP 2020 brought further convergence with the GDPR, e.g., by aligning the notion of
‘controller’ and introducing new definitions that are very similar or identical to the ones used
in the GDPR (e.g., of ‘processor’ 2143, ‘profiling’ and ‘data breach’) 2144. The FADP 2020
codifies the territorial scope of the Swiss data protection rules 2145, making clear that they
apply to events producing effects in Switzerland, even if they take place abroad 2146.

The main data protection principles provided under the Swiss data protection framework that
were in place at the time of the adoption of the adequacy decision have remained in place
without substantial changes. This is the case for the principles of lawfulness 2147, purpose
limitation2148, proportionality 2149, data accuracy 2150, data security 2151, and accountability. At
the same time, case law and the recent reforms have further strengthened a number of
principles (e.g., the principles of data minimisation and storage limitation) and introduced
new obligations (e.g., with respect to transparency, data breach notification and
accountability).

As regards the principle of fairness of data processing, the Federal Administrative Court
confirmed in 2009 that, to ensure fairness of processing, personal data may not be collected or
otherwise processed in a way that the data subject would not expect and would not agree
to 2152. Similarly, the Federal Administrative Court has also further explained the legal
implications of the principle of purpose limitation, by clarifying that personal data may be
processed for purposes compatible with the original purpose 2153. The FADP 2020 codified

2143
      Like the FADP 1992, the FADP 2020 contains specific obligations when controllers engage a processor
(Article 9 FADP 2020), including that the relationship between both parties must be regulated by a contract or
law, the controller must ensure that the processor guarantees data security, and the data is only processed by the
processor in the same way as the controller would be allowed to do so. The FADP 2020 adds a further
requirement, only allowing the processor to engage a sub-processor with the prior authorisation of the controller
(Article 9(3) FADP 2020).
2144
     Article 5 FADP 2020.
2145
     The FADP 1992 was already applied broadly to situations with international aspects, including in public law,
under the effects theory. For example, the Federal Court held that images taken in Switzerland and published in
such a way that they can be accessed in Switzerland also have an overriding connection with Switzerland, even if
the images are processed abroad and are not posted directly from Switzerland (ATF 138 II 346 ["Google Street
View"]).
2146
     Article 3 FADP 2020. See also Articles 14 and 15 FADP 2020 on the obligations for controllers established
outside of Switzerland to, under certain conditions, appoint a representative in Switzerland.
2147
     See the general principle of lawfulness in Article 6(1)-(2) FADP 2020, as well as Articles 30-31 FADP 2020
(for private operators, making clear that any processing may not unlawfully interfere with the rights of data
subjects), and Article 34 FADP 2020 (for federal public authorities, in general only allowing data processing if
there is a statutory basis, or exceptionally and in a particular case, for instance on the basis of consent of the
individual or where the processing is necessary to protect the life or physical integrity of an individual). See also
Article 36 FADP 2020 with respect to the legal bases for disclosure of personal data by federal public
authorities.
2148
     Article 6(3) FADP 2020.
2149
     Article 6(2) FADP 2020.
2150
     Article 6(5) FADP 2020.
2151
     Article 8 FADP 2020.
2152
      Decision of the Federal Administrative Court A-3144/2008 of 27 May 2009. Article 4 FADP set out the
general principle that personal data may only be processed lawfully. It also refers to the principle of good faith
(‘bonne foi’, ‘Treu und Glauben’). The principle of good faith, equivalent to the principle of fairness in the
GDPR, obliges data controller to a loyal, trustworthy and transparent processing of personal data (the term ‘Treu
und Glauben’ in the FADP is also used in the German version of the GDPR to translate the term ‘fairness’).
2153
     Decision of the Federal Administrative Court A-3144/2008 of 27. May 2009 (c. 10.3.1 and 10.3.2) ; ATF 146
I 11 (c. 3.3.2). See also: Philippe Meier, Protection des données: fondements, principes généraux et droit privé,

                                                        282
this case law by enshrining that personal data may be collected only for specified purposes
that are recognisable to the data subject and must be further processed in a manner compatible
with those purposes 2154.

Similarly, the principle of data minimisation has further developed through case law and the
FADP 2020. The principle of proportionality (i.e., requiring that the processing of personal
data must be carried out in good faith and in a proportionate manner 2155) has been further
clarified in case law as requiring that data must be limited to what is actually and objectively
necessary for the defined purposes of processing 2156. The FADP 2020 consolidated the
principle of proportionality 2157 (as interpreted in case law) and complements it with the
principle of data protection by design and by default 2158, explicitly requiring data controllers
to ensure (prior to the processing) that the processing of personal data is limited to the
minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose.

The FADP 2020 also strengthened the requirement of storage limitation, by introducing a
clear obligation to destroy or anonymise data as soon as it is no longer needed for the purpose
of processing 2159. While the principle of proportionality under the FADP 1992 already
implied that personal data can be stored only as long as needed for the purpose of the
processing 2160, the FADP 2020 has provided a more explicit requirement of limited data
retention, in the same way as the GDPR.

Another area that has been further strengthened by the FADP 2020 concerns transparency of
data processing. The FADP 1992 already contained a general principle of transparency (by
requiring the controller to ensure that the collection of personal data and the purpose of its
processing are evident to the data subject) and obligations to proactively inform individuals
about the processing of their data in certain situations (e.g., when the processing was carried
out by federal public authorities or sensitive data is processed by private operators) 2161. The
FADP 2020 now requires any controller (i.e., private operators and federal public authorities)
to proactively inform the individual 2162. Where data is collected from the data subject, the
data controller must at the time when data are obtained, provide the data subject at least with
information on the identity and contact details of the controller, the purpose of the processing
and, where applicable, the recipients or categories of recipients to whom personal data are
transmitted. Where data has not been obtained from the data subject, the controller must
provide the data subject with the aforementioned (and additional) information within one
month or at the latest when the personal data are first disclosed to another recipient. This

Stämpfli, Bern 2011, p. 281. See also Despatch of the federal Council of 23 March 1988 to the FADP (Federal
Gazette 1988 II 451) explaining that the goal of Article 4 is to prohibit any unauthorised change of purpose when
further processing takes place.
2154
     Article 6(3) FADP 2020.
2155
     Article 4(2) FADP.
2156
     Decision A-3144/2008 of 27 May 2009 of the Federal Administrative Court. See also the Despatch of the
Federal Council of 15 September 2017 (FF 2017 6644) in its comments to Article 6, par. 2 of the FADP 2020:
“les principes d’évitement et de minimisation en constituent deux expressions [du principe de proportionnalité]”.
2157
     Article 6(2) FADP 2020.
2158
     Article 7 FADP 2020.
2159
     Article 6(4) FADP 2020.
2160
     Limited data retention stems from ‘temporal proportionality’. See: PHILIPPE MEIER, Protection des données:
fondements, principes généraux et droit privé, Stämpfli, Bern 2011, p. 270.
2161
     See Article 4(4), Article 14(1) and Article 18a(1) FADP.
2162
     Article 19 FADP 2020.

                                                      283
obligation concerns both federal administration and private entities processing personal data.
Where data are transferred abroad, data subjects must be informed about the country of
destination and the safeguards that are put in place.

With respect to data security, the DPO 2022 has extended previous obligations, by requiring
controllers and processors to put in place technical and organisational measures appropriate to
the risks in order to ensure security of data, taking into account several factors (e.g., the type
of data processed, the purpose of the processing, the risks for the rights of individuals)2163.
The DPO 2022 also specifies the types of measures that controllers and processors must have
in place (e.g., storage control, recovery, transport control, data integrity) and requires them to
keep records of such measures. In addition, the FADP 2020 introduced a requirement for
controllers to notify data breaches as soon as possible: (1) to the federal data protection
authority (Federal Data Protection and Information Commissioner, FDPIC), where they are
likely to result in a high risk to the data subject’s personality or fundamental rights; and, (2) to
the data subject, where necessary for his or her protection or when required by the FDPIC 2164.

Moreover, the FADP 2020 and the DPO 2022 2165 have modernised previously existing
accountability requirements (e.g., to maintain a record of processing, issue a privacy policy
and register certain types of processing with the FDPIC, e.g., in case of large-scale processing
of sensitive data 2166), including by moving away from prior registration requirements 2167. The
FADP 2020 requires controllers to implement the principles of data protection by design and
by default 2168, keep an inventory of processing activities 2169, conduct a data protection impact
assessment for data processing likely to result in a high risk to the data subject’s personality
or fundamental rights 2170, and, in certain circumstances, consult the FDPIC prior to data
processing (e.g., if an impact assessment shows that the processing would involve high risks
for the concerned individuals) 2171. Moreover, the FADP 2020 foresees the appointment of
data protection officers (as possibility for private operators and as obligation for federal public
authorities) 2172, and provides for the possibility to adhere to sectoral codes of conduct 2173 and
participate in certification schemes 2174.

In addition to the strengthening of data protection principles and obligations, the protections
for special categories of data have been reinforced since the adoption of the adequacy
decision. The FADP 1992 already offered additional protection for personal data on religious,
ideological, political or trade union-related views or activities, health data, data related to


2163
     Articles 1-6 DPO 2020.
2164
     Article 24 FADP 2022.
2165
     See Articles 1-6 and 42 DPO 2022.
2166
     See Articles 7, 10a and 11a FADP 1992, as well as Articles 3-4, 8-11, 16, 18, 20-21 and 28 DPO 1993.
2167
     Article 11a of the FADP 1992 required all federal public bodies and certain private operators (i.e., that
regularly process sensitive personal data or personality profiles, or regularly disclose personal data to third
parties) to register their data processing with the FDPIC. Under the FADP 2020, this obligation only applies to
federal public bodies.
2168
     Article 7 FADP 2020.
2169
     Article 12 FADP 2020.
2170
     Article 22 FADP 2020.
2171
     Article 23 FADP 2020.
2172
     Article 10 FADP 2020.
2173
     Article 11 FADP 2020.
2174
     Article 13 FADP 2020 (see also Article 11 of the FADP 1992).

                                                     284
intimate sphere 2175, racial origin, social aid measures and administrative and criminal
proceedings and sanctions. The FAPD 2020, similarly to the EU data protection framework,
has added to the list also data on ethnic origin, genetic data and biometric data which uniquely
identifies a natural person 2176.

With respect to the rights of data subjects, the Swiss data protection framework continues to
provide for a right of access, correction and erasure 2177, as well as a right to object 2178. At the
same time, the FADP 2020 has reinforced and modernised several rights.

This is particularly the case for the right of access 2179. Under the FADP 1992, any individual
could request information from a private controller or federal public authority as to whether
data concerning him or her is being processed. The data controller was in turn required to
inform the data subject of all data collected on him or her and provide additional information,
including the source of the data and the purpose of the processing. Under the FADP 2020,
controllers are required to provide additional information in response to an access request
(including the identity and contact details of the controller, the retention period and the
recipients or categories of recipients to whom personal data are disclosed), as well as any
information necessary to enable them to assert their rights and to ensure the transparency of
the processing 2180. With respect to the right of correction, the FADP 2020 limits the
possibility for controllers to refuse to rectify inaccurate data to situations where a statutory
obligation prohibits the rectification, or the personal data is processed for archiving purposes
in the public interest 2181.

Moreover, the FADP 2020 has introduced new rights. This includes rules for automated
individual decision-making, in particular a duty to inform the data subject about decisions
taken exclusively on the basis of automated processing that produce legal effects or similarly
significantly affect the individual 2182, to give the individual the opportunity to make known
his or her views upon request and to ensure review by a natural person upon request of the
data subject. In addition, the FADP 2020 provides for a right to data portability, i.e., a right to
receive a copy of personal data processed by automated means in a commonly used format, or
to have such personal data transferred to another controller 2183.

2175
     The notion of ‘intimate sphere’ includes any information that the data subject would not share with others or
only with a restricted circle of close persons, such as sexual life and sexual orientation, see ATF 137 I 167 (c.
9.1.1), 118 IV 41 (c. 4).
2176
     Article 5(c) FADP 2020.
2177
     Article 32(2)(c) (for private operators) and Article 41(1) FADP 2020.
2178
     Article 32(2)(a)-(b) and 41(1)(a) FADP 2020, according to which personal data may not be processed where
an individual has expressly objected to it, unless there is an overriding public or private interest to continue
processing the data. This right also applies in case personal data is processed for direct marketing purposes. With
respect to public authorities, the FADP 2020 (Article 37) provide individuals with an additional specific right to
object to the disclosure of their data.
2179
     Like the GDPR, the Swiss legal framework also provides for the possibility to refuse, restrict or defer the
exercise of the right of access in specific circumstances, e.g., where providing the information would jeopardise
the outcome of a criminal investigation, or to protect the overriding interests of third parties (Article 26-27
FADP 2020). Similar restrictions/limitations apply to the right of the data subject to obtain information in
accordance with the transparency principle (Article 20 FADP 2020).
2180
     Article 25 of the FADP 2020. The relevant information must be provided free of charge and, in principle,
within 30 days of the request.
2181
     Article 32(1) FADP 2020.
2182
     Article 21 FADP 2020.
2183
     Article 28 FADP 2020 and Articles 20-22 DPO 2022.

                                                       285
Finally, the rules on international transfers of personal data have been reinforced. As a general
rule, personal data may only be transferred if the data is subject to adequate protections in the
country of destination 2184. Under the FADP 1992, the FDPIC had developed an indicative list
of countries that provide an adequate level of data protection, but it remained the
responsibility of the data exporter to assess whether and ensure that data will be adequately
protected in a third country. With the FADP 2020, the Federal Council is in charge of
deciding whether a State or international organisation offers an adequate level of protection,
on which data exporters can rely to transfer data without the need to carry out their own
assessment or put in place specific safeguards 2185. The criteria to be taken into account for the
evaluation of the adequacy of the level of protection are listed in Article 8 of the DPO 2022,
referring inter alia to the international obligations of the country/organisation, the rule of law
and respect for human rights, applicable data protection legislation and its implementation,
the effective functioning of one or more independent authorities responsible for data
protection, etc. A list of States, territories, specific sectors in a State and international
organisations adequately protecting personal data, published in Annex 1 to the DPO 2022,
includes members of the European Economic Area and most countries that have received an
adequacy decision from the EU 2186.

If a third country is not recognised as providing an adequate level of data protection, personal
data may only be transferred to that country if sufficient safeguards are put in place by the
data exporter and importer to ensure an adequate level of protection (e.g., by means of
contractual clauses or binding corporate rules 2187) or on the basis of specific statutory grounds
(e.g., if the individual has consented to the transfer, the transfer is necessary in a specific case
to safeguard an overriding public interest, the transfer is necessary in a specific case to protect
the life of the data subject, etc. 2188). The FDPIC has recognised the modernised standard
contractual clauses adopted by the European Commission in June 2021 2189 (with some
modifications to adapt it to the domestic legal framework) as an instrument that can be used
by Swiss data exporters for data transfers to countries without an adequate level of data
protection 2190.

       1.2. Oversight, enforcement and redress


2184
     Article 16(1) FADP 2020.
2185
     Article 16(1) FADP 2020.
2186
     Annex 1 to the DPO 2022 lists the following countries and territories as adequately protecting personal
data: Andorra, Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada (commercial organisations), Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Faroe Islands, Finland, France, Germany, Gibraltar, Greece, Guernsey,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Isle of Man, Israel, Italy, Jersey, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, United Kingdom, Uruguay.
2187
     See Article 16(b) and (e) FADP 2020. In June 2021, in the context of the Schrems II judgement, the FDPIC
published a “Guide to checking the admissibility of direct and indirect data transfers to third countries”, available
at:           https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home/data-protection/handel-und-wirtschaft/transborder-data-
flows.html.
2188
     See Article 17 FADP 2020.
2189
     Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2021/914 of 4 June 2021 on standard contractual clauses for the
transfer of personal data to third countries pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and
of the Council.
2190
                          See                       the                     announcement                          at:
https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/dam/edoeb/en/dokumente/datenschutz/Paper%20SCC%20def.en%2024082021%2
0(2).pdf.download.pdf/Paper%20SCC%20def.en%2024082021%20(2).pdf.

                                                        286
The independent body in charge of overseeing compliance with the data protection rules by
private operators and federal public authorities is the FDPIC 2191. Whereas, in the past, the
head of the FDPIC was appointed by the Federal Council, after which the appointment had to
be approved by the Federal Assembly, the FADP 2020 requires that the head is elected
directly by the Federal Assembly 2192. Similarly, under the FADP 2020, (s)he may only be
dismissed by the Federal Assembly 2193. The FDPIC’s tasks include advising and assisting
controllers on data protection matters, providing opinions on draft legislation that is relevant
to data protection, cooperating with domestic and foreign data protection authorities and
raising public awareness on data protection 2194. It is also involved in analysing the impact of
quickly developing technologies, such as Artificial Intelligence, on the protection of personal
data. 2195 The supervision of data processing by cantonal and communal public authorities is
carried out by independent cantonal data protection authorities 2196.

In terms of powers, the FADP 2020 provides that the FDPIC may initiate an investigation on
its own initiative or upon request of a third party with respect to both private operators and
public authorities 2197. In carrying out its investigations, the FDPIC has access to any relevant
information 2198. If the data subject has filed a report, the FDPIC shall inform him or her about
the steps taken in response and the result of any investigation 2199. The FDPIC’s investigatory
and enforcement powers have been strengthened by the FADP 2020. In the past, the FDPIC
could issue recommendations and, if such recommendations were not followed, refer the
matter to the federal courts (in cases concerning private operators) or the Federal
Chancellery/competent Federal Department (in cases concerning federal public bodies) whose
decisions could in turn be appealed by the FDPIC before the courts 2200. Under the FDAP
2020, the FDPIC has the power to compel access to premises and documents 2201 and adopt
binding decisions with respect to both private operators and public authorities, including to
modify, suspend or terminate processing or destroy personal data 2202. It will be important that
the FDPIC makes full use of these new powers in the future, as they constitute essential aspect
of the overall effectiveness of the system.



2191
     The FDPIC is appointed for a term of four years, which may be renewed twice (Article 44(1) FADP 2020).
The FADP 2020 provides that the FDPIC exercises its duties independently, does not receive instructions from
any authority or third party, has its own budget and appoints its own staff (Article 43(4)-(5) FADP 2020). The
FDPIC may not have any other occupation, unless specifically authorised by the Federal Assembly, provided
such other occupation does not compromise his/her independence and standing (Articles 46-47 FADP 2020).
2192
     Article 26(1) FADP and Article 43(1) FADP 2020.
2193
     This may only occur in case of serious violations of the duties of office committed wilfully or through gross
negligence, or if (s)he is permanently unable to fulfil the duties of office (Article 44(3) FADP 2020).
2194
     See Article 58 FADP 2020.
2195
     09.11.2023 - Current data protection legislation is directly applicable to AI (admin.ch)
2196
     The cantons have to meet the same requirements in terms of independence as the FDPIC. As explained
above, they have to meet the requirements of the Convention 108+ and with respect to data processing in relation
to the Schengen cooperation in criminal matters, of the Law Enforcement Directive. All cantonal data protection
laws prescribe the creation of independent data protection authorities and provide that these authorities shall be
independent in their position and in the performance of their duties.
2197
     Article 49 FADP 2020.
2198
     Article 49(3) and 50(1)(a) FADP 2020.
2199
     Article 49(4) FADP 2020.
2200
     Article 27(4)-(6) (for public authorities) and Article 29(3)-(4) FADP 1992.
2201
     Article 50 FADP 2020.
2202
     Article 51 FADP 2020.

                                                      287
In addition, the Swiss legal framework imposes criminal sanctions (fines) for certain
violations of the data protection rules by private operators. The FADP 2020 expanded the list
of violations for which fines can be imposed (adding inter alia intentional infringements of the
obligations to inform data subjects and cooperate with the FDPIC 2203, violating the duty of
care 2204, and failing to comply with a decision of the FDPIC 2205) and has imposed a maximum
amount of CHF 250 000. While such fines are in principle imposed on individuals, the FADP
2020 also foresees the possibility of fining a company, where determining who in the
organisation is responsible for the infringement would require disproportionate investigative
efforts 2206. Other Swiss laws, including the Swiss Criminal Code contain further criminal
sanctions (custodial sentences or monetary penalties) for violations of the privacy of
individuals as well (e.g., obtaining personal data without authorisation) 2207.

As regards the possibility for individuals to obtain redress, different avenues continue to be
available in the Swiss system. In particular, individuals can obtain judicial redress before the
civil courts (against private operators) and under the Administrative Procedure Act (against
public authorities), including by directly enforcing their individual rights 2208, obtaining the
termination of unlawful processing 2209, or claiming compensation for damages 2210.

The FDPIC regularly engages “upstream” with data controllers and data processors by
advising on data protection matters while projects and IT systems are being developed. This
includes working with private operators (e.g., through impact assessments) as well as federal
public bodies (e.g., in the context of digitalisation within the federal administration, the use of
cloud services and digital projects, such as contact tracing applications, related to the COVID-
19 pandemic) 2211. The FDPIC also plays an active role by advising on data protection issues
during the legislative process (e.g., in the context of the recent reform of the FADP).

Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, the FDPIC has also carried out a number of
investigations (e.g., into a data breach at a telecommunications provider 2212, the use of GPS
data by a music streaming service 2213, the processing of data by a dating application 2214, data
practices of insurance companies and financial institutions 2215, etc.). Whereas in some cases,
the identified issues were resolved during the investigation, other investigations led to the
2203
     Article 60 FADP 2020.
2204
     Article 61 FADP 2020 lists the relevant breaches of duties of care: a transfer of personal data to third
countries in breach of Article 16 FADP 2020 or without meeting the requirements of Article 17 FADP 2020;
entrusting a processor with the data processing without meeting the requirements of Article 9 FADP 2020; and
non-compliance with the minimum data security requirements adopted by the Federal Council based on Article
8(3) FADP 2020.
2205
     Article 63 FADP 2020.
2206
     Article 64 FADP 2020.
2207
     See e.g., Articles 143, 179ter and 179novies of the Criminal Code.
2208
     See Article 32 (with respect to private operators) and 41 (with respect to federal public authorities) FADP
2020.
2209
     E.g., pursuant to Article 28a of the Swiss Civil Code.
2210
     Pursuant to Article 41 and 49 of the Swiss Code of Obligations and the Federal Act on the Liability of the
Confederation, Members of its Authorities and Officials.
2211
     See e.g., the annual report of the FDPIC of 2020-2021, available at; https://edb.reader.epaper.guru/de-
CH/viewer/0d88373a-c278-44f7-9e4c-c80e4d5f1438.
2212
     See FDPIC's 27th Activity Report 2019/20: p. 20.
2213
     See FDPIC's 27th Activity Report 2019/20, p 22.
2214
     See FDPIC's 28th Activity Report 2020/21: p. 20 and 29th Activity Report 2021/22 p. 17.
2215
                                                             https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/dam/edoeb/Empfehlungen-
DS/Empfehlung%20Helsana.pdf.download.pdf/Empfehlung%20Helsana.pdf.

                                                     288
adoption of formal recommendations, which were generally followed by the concerned
controllers (e.g., in the transportation sector, retail and banking). The FDPIC also referred
several cases to the courts where its recommendations had not been followed, e.g., in a case
against the Federal Tax Administration 2216.

Finally, the FDPIC has issued a number of guidance documents (e.g., on data subject
rights 2217, cross-border data flows 2218, the processing of biometric data 2219, the processing of
data for marketing purposes 2220 and technical and organisational measures 2221). The FDPIC
also provides assistance to individuals by answering queries, running a phone helpline and
offering model letters which can be used by data subjects to exercise their rights 2222.

2. ACCESS TO AND USE OF PERSONAL DATA TRANSFERRED FROM THE
   EUROPEAN UNION BY PUBLIC AUTHORITIES IN SWITZERLAND

       2.1. General legal framework

The limitations and safeguards that apply to the collection and subsequent use of personal
data by Swiss public authorities for criminal law enforcement and national security purposes
follow from the overarching constitutional framework, specific laws regulating data access, as
well as rules that apply to the processing of personal data.

The Swiss Federal Constitution recognises privacy and the protection of personal data as
fundamental rights. Any restrictions of these rights must have a legal basis, must be justified
in the public interest or for the protection of the fundamental rights of others, must be
proportionate and respect the essence of fundamental rights 2223. Similar rights and restrictions
apply under cantonal constitutions. Pursuant to the Federal Constitution, cantonal
constitutions must be compatible with federal law and the latter prevails in case of
conflict 2224. While cantonal constitutions may provide additional protections, they must at
least provide for the same rights (and conditions for restrictions) as the Federal Constitution,
either by directly referring to the provisions of the Federal Constitution (as is for instance
done in Article 10 of the Constitution of the Canton of Zurich) or by providing for their own
constitutional guarantees (see e.g., Articles 21 and 43 of the Constitution of the Canton of
Geneva). Moreover, all fundamental rights guaranteed by the Federal Constitution apply
directly in the entire Swiss legal system and must be respected by all state organs and public
bodies at federal, cantonal and communal level 2225.


2216
      See the annual report of the FDPIC 2019-2020.
2217
      https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home/datenschutz/grundlagen/auskunftsrecht.html.
2218
     https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/dam/edoeb/en/dokumente/datenschutz/Anleitung%20f%C3%BCr%20die%20Pr
%C3%BCfung%20von%20Daten%C3%BCbermittlungen%20mit%20Auslandbezug%20EN.pdf.download.pdf/
Anleitung%20f%C3%BCr%20die%20Pr%C3%BCfung%20von%20Daten%C3%BCbermittlungen%20mit%20
Auslandbezug%20EN.pdf.
2219
      https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home/deredoeb/infothek/infothek-ds.html.
2220
      https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home/datenschutz/arbeit_wirtschaft/werbung_marketing.html.
2221
      https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/en/home/datenschutz/internet_technologie.html.
2222
         https://www.edoeb.admin.ch/edoeb/fr/home/protection-des-donnees/dokumentation/lettres-type/comment-
proceder-lorsque-vous-souhaitez-soumettre-une-demande-de.html. For example, according to information
received from the FDPIC, it received around 1680 requests in 2021.
2223
      Articles 13 and 36 of the Federal Constitution.
2224
      Article 49 and 51 of the Federal Constitution.
2225
      Article 35 of the Federal Constitution.

                                                    289
In addition, Switzerland is a party to the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR),
which protects the right to respect for private and family life (and the right to the protection of
personal data as part of it). According to settled case law in Switzerland, obligations under
international law, in particular agreements such as the ECHR that deal with human rights,
take precedence over federal legislation in case of a conflict 2226. Pursuant to Article 8 of the
ECHR, a public authority may only interfere with the right to privacy in accordance with the
law, in the interests of one of the aims set out in Article 8(2), and if proportionate in light of
that aim. Article 8 also requires that the interference is “foreseeable”, i.e., has a clear,
accessible basis in law, and that the law contains appropriate safeguards to prevent abuse.

Moreover, in its case law, the European Court of Human Rights has specified that any
interference with the right to privacy and data protection should be subject to an effective,
independent and impartial oversight system that must be provided for either by a judge or by
another independent body (e.g., an administrative authority or a parliamentary body) 2227.
Moreover, individuals must be provided with an effective remedy, and the European Court of
Human Rights has clarified that the remedy must be offered by an independent and impartial
body which has adopted its own rules of procedure, consisting of members that must hold or
have held high judicial office or be experienced lawyers, and that there must be no evidential
burden to be overcome in order to lodge an application with it. In undertaking its examination
of complaints by individuals, the independent and impartial body should have access to all
relevant information, including closed materials. Finally, it should have the powers to remedy
non-compliance 2228.

Therefore, through its adherence to the European Convention on Human Rights, as well as its
submission to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights, Switzerland is subject
to a number of obligations, enshrined in international law, that frame its system of
government access on the basis of principles, safeguards and individual rights similar to those
guaranteed under EU law and applicable to the Member States.

As described in more detail in sections 2.2.1 and 2.3.1, these general principles are reflected
in specific laws that regulate the access and use of personal data for criminal law enforcement
and national security purposes.

Moreover, the processing of personal data by Swiss public authorities (including criminal law
enforcement and the national security authority) is subject to specific data protection rules.

Federal criminal law enforcement authorities are first of all subject to the FADP 2020, which
lays down the conditions under which public authorities may use and disclose personal
information; reflects the principles of purpose limitation, data accuracy, transparency and
storage limitation; and provides individuals with several rights (see section 1.1 and below).
The substantive provisions of the FADP 2020 do not apply to court proceedings or the
processing of personal data in pending civil, criminal (including preliminary investigations of



2226
     AFT 125 II 417 E. 4d, AFT 144 I 126.
2227
     European Court of Human Rights, Klass and others v. Germany, Application no. 5029/71, paragraphs 17-51.
2228
     European Court of Human Rights, Kennedy v. the United Kingdom, Application no. 26839/05, (Kennedy),
paragraphs 167 and 190.

                                                    290
specific offences by the police and the prosecution) 2229 and international mutual legal
assistance proceedings 2230. In those cases, the processing of personal data and the rights of
data subjects are regulated by other statutes, in particular the Civil Procedure Code, Criminal
Procedure Code (CrimPC), Criminal Code, International Mutual Assistance in Criminal
Matters Act and Administrative Procedure Act 2231. However, the FDPIC in principle remains
competent to supervise compliance by law enforcement authorities with data protection
requirements either following from the FADP 2020 (i.e., outside of judicial proceedings) or
from those other statutes (i.e., in the context of judicial proceedings) 2232. The only exceptions
(i.e., activities/entities for which the FDPIC is not competent) are the federal courts, the
Office of the Attorney General in relation to data processing as part of criminal
proceedings 2233 and courts or federal authorities in relation to proceedings for international
mutual assistance in criminal matters. In those cases, compliance with applicable data
protection requirements is subject to the supervision of courts 2234.

Similarly, the processing of personal data by criminal law enforcement authorities at the
cantonal and communal level is subject to cantonal data protection laws and/or the CrimPC ,
which, as explained in section 1.1, contain key data protection principles, obligations and
individual rights, and ensure supervision by an independent data protection authority or, in the
context of judicial proceedings, by courts.

The processing of personal data by national security authorities is subject to specific data
protection requirements in the Intelligence Service Act and accompanying Ordinances, as
well as the FADP 2020, which applies to the extent no specific provisions are foreseen under
the Intelligence Service Act. These different legal instruments impose key data protection
principles (principles of purpose limitation, data minimisation, accuracy, security), provide
individuals with data protection rights and subject the processing of personal data by
intelligence agencies to independent oversight.

These safeguards, including corresponding limitations applicable to the criminal law
enforcement and national security areas can be invoked by individuals before independent
administrative bodies (e.g., the FDPIC, cantonal data protection authorities) and courts to
obtain redress (see sections 2.2.4 and 2.3.4).

       2.2. Access and use by Swiss public authorities for criminal law enforcement
            purposes
2229
     Conversely, the processing of personal data in the context of preventive investigations by the police (i.e.,
prior to an imminent danger or crime) remains fully subject to the FADP 2020, see Ruling A-4186/2015 of the
Federal Administrative Court of 28 January 2016.
2230
     Article 2(3) FADP 2020. See also Articles 299-300 of the CrimPC.
2231
     Administrative proceedings at first instance are fully subject to the FADP 2020 (see Article 2(3) FADP
2020).
2232
     Article 4(2) FADP 2020.
2233
     The Office of the Attorney General is excluded from the supervision of the FDPIC in this case because it is
considered an independent judicial authority carrying out judicial tasks. As is the case for courts acting in their
judicial capacity, subjecting the Office to the supervision of the FDPIC would affect the separation of powers
and independence of the judiciary. Since 1 September 2023, the supervision over data processing by the federal
courts is guaranteed by the Administrative Commission of the Federal Supreme Court, and with support by the
Federal Supreme Court’s data protection officer (Supervisory Regulations of the Federal Supreme Court of 12
June 2023).
2234
     At federal level, the Federal Criminal Court is responsible for such oversight, see Article 37(1) Federal Act
on the Organisation of Federal Criminal Authorities.

                                                       291
In Switzerland, criminal law enforcement functions are mainly carried out by cantonal and
communal authorities, whereas the Federal Office of Police investigates offences falling
under federal jurisdiction, such as inter-cantonal or international organised crime (e.g.,
terrorism and terrorist financing), corruption and money laundering 2235. Swiss law imposes a
number of limitations on the access and use of personal information for criminal law
enforcement purposes by each of these authorities and provides oversight and redress
mechanisms. The conditions under which such access can take place and the safeguards
applicable to the use of those powers are described in the following sections.

        2.2.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

Personal data transferred under the adequacy decision and processed by Swiss controllers and
processors may be obtained by Swiss criminal law enforcement authorities at federal level by
means of investigative measures under the Criminal Procedure Code (CrimPC), or on the
basis of anti-money laundering and anti-terrorist financing legislation. At cantonal/communal
level, access by Swiss public authorities to personal data transferred under the adequacy
decision is, since 2011, also governed by the CrimPC 2236.

The CrimPC provides Swiss criminal law enforcement authorities with a legal basis to access
personal data through searches, seizures, surveillance of (the content of and/or the current
metadata of) post and telecommunications, and surveillance of financial transactions. It lays
down clear and precise rules on the scope and application of these measures, thereby ensuring
that the interference with the rights of individuals will be limited to what is necessary for a
specific criminal investigation and proportionate to the pursued purpose. Moreover, to
exercise these powers, judicial authorisation is in principle required (except for instance in
emergencies, as described in more detail below).

As a general requirement, the CrimPC provides that criminal law enforcement authorities
must comply with the principle of good faith, may not abuse the rights of others and are
prohibited from using methods that violate human dignity when obtaining evidence 2237. In
addition, the use of coercion, threats, promises, deception and methods that may compromise
the ability of the persons concerned to decide freely are prohibited, also if the person consents
to their use 2238.

In accordance with the CrimPC, as an overarching requirement, any compulsory measure
(including a search, seizure or surveillance of post and telecommunications) may only be
taken if (1) it is permitted by law, (2) there is a reasonable suspicion that an offence has been
committed, (3) the aims cannot be achieved by less stringent measures and (4) the seriousness
of the offence justifies the compulsory measure 2239.

A search of a house, dwelling or other not generally accessible premise may only be searched
with the consent of the owner, or if it is suspected that there are wanted persons, that there is

2235
     Article 23-24 CrimPC.
2236
     Article 1(1) CimPC. Whereas prior to the enactment of the CimPC, each canton established its own criminal
procedure rules, the CrimPC provides for the legal framework at federal, cantonal and communal level (i.e.,
there are no longer separate criminal procedural rules at cantonal or communal level).
2237
     Article 3(2) CrimPC.
2238
     Article 140 CrimPC.
2239
     Article 197 CrimPC.

                                                    292
forensic evidence or assets that must be seized, or offences are being committed 2240. A
document, recording (audio, video or other), data carrier or equipment for processing and
storing information (e.g., a computer) may be searched if it is suspected that it contains
information that is liable to seizure (see below, e.g., if it is expected that the information will
be used as evidence) 2241. Procedurally, a search must be authorised by a warrant issued by a
public prosecutor or a court 2242. In case of urgency, a search may be authorised orally, but
such authorisation must be confirmed subsequently in writing2243. In principle, the proprietor
must be present during the search and, as regards searches of documents, recordings, data
carriers or processing equipment, has the possibility to comment on the content of the
information 2244.

The seizure of items belonging to an accused or a third party may take place if it is expected
that the items will be used as evidence; will be used as security for procedural costs, monetary
penalties, fines or damages; will have to be returned to persons suffering harm or will have to
be forfeited 2245. Certain items that could be used as evidence may nevertheless not be seized,
such as personal records and correspondence belonging to the accused, if the interest in
protecting their privacy outweighs the interest in prosecution 2246. A seizure must be
authorised by a warrant issued by a public prosecutor or a court that sets out the grounds for
the seizure 2247. In urgent cases, a seizure may also be ordered orally, in which case the
authorisation must be confirmed in writing afterwards 2248. Where there is a risk in any delay,
the police may provisionally seize items on behalf of the public prosecutor or the courts 2249.

Specific substantive and procedural limitations apply to the use of covert surveillance
measures (i.e., monitoring/interception of post and telecommunications, including e-mails,
communications via the internet, etc.) 2250. Covert surveillance may only be ordered by the
public prosecutor (1) if there is a strong suspicion that certain specific offences (e.g., murder,
serious assault, fraud, extortion, human trafficking, crimes related to narcotics, nuclear energy
or weapons, etc. 2251) have been committed, (2) the seriousness of the offence justifies the
surveillance and (3) other investigative activities have been unsuccessful, or the investigation




2240
     Article 244 CrimPC.
2241
     Article 246 CrimPC.
2242
     Articles 198(1) and 241(1) CrimPC. The warrant must indicate the premises, property or records to be
searched; the purpose of the measure and the authorities or persons authorised to conduct the search (Article
241(2) CrimPC).
2243
     Article 241 CrimPC.
2244
     Article 245(2) and 247(1) CrimPC.
2245
     Article 263(1) CrimPC.
2246
     Article 264 CrimPC.
2247
     Articles 198(1) and 263(2) CrimPC.
2248
     Article 263(2) CrimPC.
2249
     Article 263(3) CrimPC.
2250
     Criminal law enforcement authorities may also, upon request, obtain subscriber information (e.g., the name,
date of birth and address of the subscriber, as well as the type of services to which (s)he subscribed, see Article
21 SPTA) from the Post and Telecommunications Surveillance Service (see below) for the purpose of carrying
out their tasks (Article 15 SPTA). The same applies if it is suspected that a criminal offence has been committed
via the internet, in which case telecommunication providers are required to provide the Service with information
necessary to identify the perpetrator (which may in turn be obtained by criminal law enforcement authorities),
see Article 22 SPTA.
2251
     See the list in Article 269(2) CrimPC, read in conjunction with the Criminal Code.

                                                       293
would otherwise have no prospect of success or would be made unreasonably complicated 2252.
Only the communications of the accused may be monitored, or of a third party if there is
reason to believe based on specific information that the accused uses the communication
service of the third party or the latter receives/transmits communications on behalf of the
accused 2253. A public prosecutor may also request metadata relating to
telecommunications 2254 (1) if there is a strong suspicion that a felony or misdemeanour has
been committed, (2) the seriousness of the offence justifies the request and (3) other
investigative activities have been unsuccessful, or the investigation would otherwise have no
prospect of success or would be made unreasonably complicated 2255. Metadata may be
requested for the six months prior to the date of the request 2256.

Procedurally, the use of covert surveillance or the collection of metadata relating to
telecommunications must first be ordered by a public prosecutor and must subsequently be
authorised by a court (the Compulsory Measures Court) 2257. In particular, within 24 hours of
ordering the surveillance or release of information, the public prosecutor must inform the
Compulsory Measures Court of the order and the reasons therefor (and provide relevant
documentation) 2258. The court must decide within 5 days to grant or refuse the authorisation,
and may impose a time limit or other conditions, or request further information or
investigations 2259. An authorisation may be issued for a maximum of three months, with a
possibility to extend for periods of three months at a time, again upon authorisation of the
Court 2260. The public prosecutor must stop surveillance immediately if the abovementioned
requirements are no longer fulfilled or the authorisation or its extension is refused2261.
Documents and data carriers obtained through unauthorised surveillance activities must be


2252
      Article 269 CrimPC. If these requirements are met and previous surveillance measures have been
unsuccessful or would be futile or disproportionately difficult, the public prosecutor may also order the use of
special technical devices (to listen to or record conversations, identify a person/property or determine their
location), see Article 268bis CrimPC. Similarly, under the same conditions and for the investigation of specific
offences listed in Article 286(2) CrimPC, the public prosecutor may order the introduction of special software
into a data processing system to intercept and recover the content of communications and telecommunications
metadata ( Article 269ter CrimPC). In this case, the order of the public prosecutor must specify the desired data
types and the non-public spaces that may have to be entered to introduce the software system. Any data collected
using such software that does not meet the abovementioned conditions must be destroyed immediately. See
Article 269ter CrimPC.
2252
     I.e., the data that indicates with whom, when, for how long, and from where the person under surveillance is
or has been communicating, as well as the technical characteristics of the communication concerned (secondary
telecommunications data), see Article 273(1) CrimPC in conjunction with Article 8(b) Federal Act on the
Surveillance of Post and Telecommunications (SPTA).
2253
     Article 270 CrimPC.
2254
     I.e., the data that indicates with whom, when, for how long, and from where the person under surveillance is
or has been communicating, as well as the technical characteristics of the communication concerned (secondary
telecommunications data), see Article 273(1) CrimPC in conjunction with Article 8(b) SPTA.
2255
     Article 273(1) CrimPC.
2256
     Article 273(3) CrimPC.
2257
     Article 272(1) and Article 273(2) CrimPC.
2258
     Article 274(1) CrimPC.
2259
     Article 274(2) CrimPC. The decision of the court must contain a brief statement of the reasons. If enquiries
reveal that the person under surveillance is changing his or her telecommunications connection regularly, the
Compulsory Measures Court may, by way of exception, authorise the surveillance of all identified connections
used by the person under surveillance so that the authorisation is not required in each individual case (general
authorisation), see Article 272(2) CrimPC.
2260
     Article 274(5) CrimPC.
2261
     Article 275(1) CrimPC.

                                                      294
destroyed immediately and the results of unauthorised surveillance operations may not be
used 2262.

The surveillance of post and telecommunications is carried out with the assistance of the Post
and Telecommunications Surveillance Service (PTSS), which is administratively assigned to
the Federal Department of Justice and Police but performs its tasks autonomously 2263. The
PTSS operates a processing system in which it receives data requested by law enforcement
authorities (in accordance with the abovementioned procedure) from telecommunication
providers and makes it available to the relevant authorities 2264. The PTSS must keep
documentation on inter alia the requests it has received, related authorisations, confirmations
from the providers required to cooperate about the surveillance carried out, etc. 2265. In
addition, it is required to publish annual statistics about surveillance carried out, including the
measures that were used, the type of offences that were being investigated, the authorities
requesting the surveillance, the duration of the surveillance and the nature of the information
that was collected 2266.

Individuals subject to surveillance must be notified thereof (as well as of the reason for, type
of and duration of the surveillance) by the public prosecutor at the latest when the preliminary
proceedings (i.e., the police inquiry and the investigation by the prosecutor 2267) are
concluded 2268. This notification may only be deferred or dispensed with upon the
authorisation of the Compulsory Measures Court, if the findings are not used as evidence in
court proceedings and deferring or dispensing with notice is necessary to protect overriding
public or private interests 2269.

Pursuant to the CrimPC, the Compulsory Measures Court may also, at the request of the
public prosecutor, order the surveillance of banking transactions 2270, in order to investigate
felonies or misdemeanours. The account holder must in this case be notified under the same
conditions as described above for the surveillance of communications 2271.

Finally, criminal law enforcement authorities may also indirectly receive personal data from
the Swiss Money Laundering Reporting Office, under the Anti-Money Laundering Act
(AMLA) 2272. The AMLA requires financial intermediaries (e.g., banks, investment

2262
     Article 277 CrimPC. This has been confirmed in decisions of the Federal Supreme Court, e.g., ATF 144 IV
254 and ATF 145 IV 42.
2263
     Article 3 SPTA.
2264
      Article 7 SPTA. The system inter alia contains the content of communications of individuals under
surveillance, as well as data indicating with whom, when, for how long and from where individuals under
surveillance have been communicating. It is made available to law enforcement authorities by granting them
access to the data in the system, or by transmitted it securely to them. See Article 8-9 SPTA.
2265
     Article 9 Ordinance on the Surveillance of Post and Telecommunications (SPTO).
2266
     Article 12 and 13 SPTO
2267
     Article 299(1) CrimPC.
2268
     Article 279(1) CrimPC.
2269
     Article 279(2) CrimPC. The CrimPC does not define the meaning of "overriding public or private interests".
According to legal doctrine, overriding public interests exist when it is necessary to postpone or waive the
notification for internal or external security or to combat organised crime. Overriding private interests exist in
particular if the notification would expose a third party to a serious risk. However, the omission of the
notification must be a rare exception (JEAN-RICHARD-DIT-BRESSEL MARC, in: NIGGLI/HEER/WIPRÄCHTIGER
(Hrsg.), Basler Kommentar, Strafprozessordnung, 2. Aufl. 2014, N 8 zu Article 279 StPO).
2270
     Article 284 CrimPC.
2271
     Article 284(3) CrimPC.
2272
     Federal Act on Combating Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing of 10 October 1997 (SR 955.0).

                                                      295
companies, insurance institutions, securities firms, payment systems, etc. 2273) as well as
dealers (natural/legal persons that deal in goods commercially and in doing so accept cash)2274
to report assets or cash payments for which there are reasonable grounds to suspect that they
are connected to money laundering or terrorist financing to the Money Laundering Reporting
Office 2275. Similarly, authorities that are charged with the supervision of financial
intermediaries (e.g., the Financial Market Supervisory Authority, the Federal Gaming Board)
are also required to report to the Reporting Office if they have reasonable grounds to suspect
that a money laundering or terrorist financing offence has been committed 2276. The Reporting
Office is located in the Federal Office of Police and acts as a relay point between financial
intermediaries and law enforcement authorities. It must immediately notify the responsible
prosecution authority if it has reasonable doubts that an offence relating to money laundering
or terrorist financing has been/is being committed 2277. The information received from the
Reporting Office can only be processed by a criminal law enforcement authority in
accordance with the requirements described below in section 2.2.2.

         2.2.2. Further use of the information collected

The processing of personal data by federal and cantonal criminal law enforcement authorities
in the context of criminal investigations/proceedings is subject to specific data protection
rules laid down in the CrimPC and Criminal Code. As a general requirement, the CrimPC
provides that personal data must be obtained from the individual concerned or with their
knowledge, unless the proceedings would otherwise be prejudiced, or unreasonable
inconvenience or expense would be incurred 2278. If personal data is obtained without the
knowledge of the individual, (s)he must be notified immediately, although such notification
may be dispensed with or postponed where necessary for overriding public or private
interests. When processing personal data, law enforcement authorities must distinguish
between different categories of data subjects and between personal data based on facts and
personal data based on personal assessments 2279.

The CrimPC also imposes the principle of data accuracy 2280, as well as limitations on the
further use and disclosure of data in pending criminal proceedings 2281. In particular, personal
data from pending criminal proceedings may in principle only be disclosed for use in other
pending proceedings if there are grounds for assuming that the data will make a significant
contribution to the clarification of the facts 2282. In some cases however, criminal law
enforcement authorities are obliged to disclose such personal data on the basis of other
statutes 2283, i.e., to the Federal Intelligence Service (in order for the Service to carry out its

2273
     Article 2(2) AMLA.
2274
     Article 2(1) AMLA.
2275
     Article 9 AMLA. The Reporting Office may require additional information from financial intermediaries to
analyse their reports (Article 11a AMLA).
2276
     Article 16(
2277
     Article 23(4) AMLA.
2278
     Article 95 CrimPC.
2279
     Article 95a CrimPC.
2280
     Article 98 CrimPC.
2281
     Article 96 CrimPC.
2282
     Article 96(1) CrimPc. Data should therefore neither be requested nor transmitted if it is not necessary for the
clarification of the facts, e.g., preventive data collection, see Basler Kommentar zur Strafprozessordnung, 2.
Aufl. 2014, Bd. 2, N 21.
2283
     Article 96(2) CrimPc.

                                                       296
tasks, see below section 2.3.1); in response to requests from individuals exercising their right
of access with respect to different police information systems (e.g., the Schengen Information
System); and to criminal police central offices (in charge of the fight against organised
international crime) upon their request. In terms of data retention, the CrimPC provides that,
after the conclusion of proceedings, case documents must be preserved at least until
conclusion of the time limits for prosecution and for the execution of the sentence have
expired 2284.

In the context of administrative assistance on police matters or mutual legal assistance
cooperation, the sharing of personal data with third country (i.e., non-Schengen) law
enforcement authorities or international organisations is subject to specific limitations. In
particular, such sharing may not take place if this would seriously endanger the privacy of
individuals, in particular due to a lack of adequate protection 2285. Adequate protection may be
ensured by the legislation of a third country (if the country benefits from an adequacy
decision adopted by the European Commission), an international treaty or specific
guarantees 2286. Exceptionally 2287, personal data may also be disclosed if necessary in a
particular case (1) to protect the life or physical integrity of an individual, (2) to prevent
imminent serious danger threatening the public security of a Schengen or a third country, (3)
to prevent, detect or prosecute a criminal offence, provided that disclosure does not conflict
with the overriding legitimate interests of the individual, or (4) to exercise or enforce legal
claims against a criminal law enforcement authority, provided that disclosure does not conflict
with the overriding legitimate interests of the individual 2288.

The processing of personal data by criminal law enforcement authorities outside of criminal
proceedings (e.g., in the context of a preventative investigation or once criminal proceedings
are concluded) is subject to the FADP 2020 (for federal law enforcement authorities) and
cantonal data protection laws (for cantonal law enforcement authorities) 2289. For federal
criminal law enforcement authorities, the FADP 2020 contains requirements on inter alia
purpose limitation, data accuracy, transparency, storage limitation and data security, as


2284
     Article 99(2), in conjunction with Article 103 CrimPC. Specific data retention requirements also apply to
data processed by the PTSS in its processing system. Different retention periods apply depending on the type of
investigation (e.g., request for mutual legal assistance, search for a missing person) and type of data collected
(e.g., data collected in the context of mobile phone localisation), see Article 11 SPTA.
2285
     Article 349c(1) Criminal Code and Article 11f(1) International Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Act.
2286
     Article 349c(2) Criminal Code and Article 11f(2) International Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Act.
In the context of administrative police cooperation, federal authorities are moreover required to inform the
FDPIC of the categories of disclosures made on the basis of specific guarantees (Article 349c(3) Criminal Code).
2287
     In the context of administrative assistance, a Swiss authority may exceptionally also disclose data to another
recipient than a law enforcement authority in a third country where, in particular cases of emergency, it is not
possible to disclose personal data to the competent authority of a third country through the normal channels of
police cooperation, if the disclosure is essential to fulfil its statutory task and no overriding interests of the data
subject worthy of protection stand in the way of disclosure (Article 349e(1) Criminal Code). In this case, the
Swiss authority is obliged to inform the recipient that the data may only be used for the purposes specified by the
authority and to inform the competent authority of the third country (Article 349e(2)-(4) Criminal Code). Federal
criminal law enforcement authorities are again required to inform the FDPIC of such disclosures without delay
and to document each disclosure of personal data (Article 349e(5) Criminal Code).
2288
     Article 349c(4) Criminal Code and Article 11f(3) International Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters Act.
Pursuant to Article 349c(5) Criminal Code, federal criminal law enforcement authorities are again required to
inform the FDPIC when relying on these grounds for international data sharing in the context of administrative
cooperation.
2289
     See also Article 99(1) CrimPC.

                                                         297
described in more detail in section 1.1 As regards the sharing of personal data with third
countries, the requirements for international transfers of personal data of the FADP 2020
apply. As explained in section 1.1, ssimilar obligations apply under cantonal data protection
laws.

        2.2.3. Oversight

The activities of Swiss criminal law enforcement authorities are supervised by different
bodies.

The FDPIC supervises compliance by the federal police with the FADP 2020 and other
federal data protection regulations 2290. In particular, whereas in the past, the supervisory
powers of the FDPIC only covered the processing of personal data by the federal police
outside pending criminal proceedings, the FADP 2020 has extended them to all data
processing by the federal police (whether before, during or after criminal proceedings).
Depending on the stage of the investigation/proceedings, the FDPIC will oversee compliance
with the FADP 2020 (e.g., in preventative investigations or once criminal proceedings have
ended) or with the data protection provisions of the CrimPC and Criminal Code (e.g., during
the criminal investigation, court proceedings and in the context of international mutual legal
assistance cooperation). In exercising its supervisory role, the FDPIC can make use of all of
its investigatory and remedial powers, as described in section 1.2. Compliance of the
processing of personal data by the federal public prosecutor with the FADP 2020 (outside of
pending criminal proceedings) and the data protection requirements of the CrimPC and
Criminal Code (during criminal proceedings) is supervised by the FDPIC and the Federal
Criminal Court respectively 2291. Compliance of data processing by cantonal police and
prosecutors with cantonal data protection laws (for data processing outside of criminal
proceedings) and the CrimPC and Criminal Code (during criminal proceedings) is supervised
by cantonal data protection authorities and courts respectively.

The activities of the federal public prosecutor are subject to independent oversight by a
Supervisory Authority that may issue general instructions to the public prosecutor on the
performance of its duties and monitor compliance with those instructions 2292. It may carry out
inspections and obtain information from the public prosecutor 2293. If the Supervisory
Authority finds that the public prosecutor or a deputy has breached official duties, it may take
disciplinary measures (warnings, reprimands, wage reductions) and, if it considers that
conditions for impeachment are met, submit a request for removal from office to the Federal




2290
     Article 4(1) FADP 2020.
2291
     Article 4(2d) FADP 2020 and Article 37(1) Federal Act on the Organisation of Federal Criminal Authorities.
2292
     The Supervisory Authority consists of seven members elected by the Federal Assembly (one judge of the
Federal Supreme Court, one judge of the Federal Criminal Court, two lawyers registered at cantonal level and
three professionals that do not belong to one of the other categories), see Article 23 Federal Law on the
Organisation of Federal Criminal Authorities. The members may not be members of the Federal Assembly or
Federal Council and may not be employed by the government (Article 24 Federal Law on the Organisation of
Federal Criminal Authorities-. They are appointed for four years and may only be dismissed by the Federal
Assembly in case of intentional or grossly negligent serious breach of official duty, or permanent loss of the
ability to exercise the office (Article 26 Federal Law on the Organisation of Federal Criminal Authorities).
2293
     Article 29-30 Federal Law on the Organisation of Federal Criminal Authorities.

                                                     298
Assembly 2294. Similar oversight bodies that supervise the activities of cantonal public
prosecutors exist at cantonal level.

Finally, activities of federal law enforcement authorities related to state security are subject to
parliamentary oversight by the Control Delegation (CDel) of the Federal Assembly, which
consists of three members of the House of Representatives (National Council) and three
members of the Senate (Council of States) 2295. The CDel oversees the legality, expediency
and effectiveness of such activities 2296. In carrying out its oversight tasks, the CDel has
unrestricted access to information, including secret intelligence information 2297. According to
the “Action principles of the Control Delegation” developed by the CDel itself 2298, it may
request reports, carry out regular inspections/investigations and on-site visit, etc. As a result
of an investigation, the CDel can issue recommendations 2299.

        2.2.4. Redress

The Swiss system offers different avenues to obtain redress, including compensation for
damages.

First, individuals can exercise different rights against criminal law enforcement authorities.

While criminal proceedings are pending, individuals have, in accordance with their right to
inspect case documents, the right to information on personal data relating to them that has
been processed 2300. This applies to parties to the proceedings, as well as third parties
adversely affected by procedural acts 2301. The provision of information can only be restricted
if there is a justified suspicion that the individual is abusing his or her rights or if necessary to
safeguard public or private interests in preserving confidentiality 2302. In this case, the
information must be granted retrospectively and in a suitable form, as soon as the reason for
the restriction no longer exists 2303.

After the conclusion of criminal proceedings, individuals can exercise their rights under the
FADP 2020 and cantonal data protection laws 2304. Under the FADP 2020, individuals have a
right of access, correction, erasure, as well as a right to object, including vis-à-vis criminal



2294
     Article 31 Federal Law on the Organisation of Federal Criminal Authorities, as well as Article 16, 17 and 19
Ordinance of the Federal Assembly on the organisation and tasks of the supervisory authority over the Office of
the Attorney General of Switzerland.
2295
     Article 81 IntelSA and Article 53 Act on the Federal Assembly.
2296
     Article 52(2) Act on the Federal Assembly.
2297
     See Article 169(2) of the Federal Constitution, which provides that secrecy rules do not apply to special
delegations of supervisory committees established by law.
2298
        Principes d’action de la Délégation des Commissions de gestion, avalable at:
https://www.parlament.ch/centers/documents/fr/gpdel-handlungsgrundsaetze-f.pdf.
2299
     Article 158 Act on the Federal Assembly.
2300
     Article 97 CrimPC and Article 10 SPTA. Parties to the case may always inspect documents relating to the
proceedings, whereas third parties may do so if they have an academic or other legitimate interest in doing so
and inspection is not contrary to any overriding public or private interests (Article 101 CrimPC).
2301
     Article 105(1f) CrimPC. This right is not granted to third parties whose personal data appears in the files.
However, based on Article 95(2) CrimPC these persons must as a rule be actively informed about the acquisition
of their personal data.
2302
     Article 108(1) CrimPC.
2303
     Article 108(5) CrimPC.
2304
     Article 99(1) CrimPC.

                                                      299
law enforcement authorities 2305. A request for access to data may be refused, restricted or
delayed if (1) this is necessary to satisfy overriding public interests, in particular Switzerland's
internal or external security, or (2) providing the information may compromise an enquiry, an
investigation or administrative or judicial proceedings 2306. Case law has clarified that whether
such a limitation to the right of access can be applied must be assessed on a case-by-case
basis, on the basis of the concrete circumstances of a case 2307. A refusal to provide
information must be limited to what is absolutely necessary and restrictions must be subject to
a balancing of interests (i.e., the existence of a public interest cannot in itself justify a
restriction) 2308. Moreover, the reasons for applying a restriction must be provided in reply to
the individual by the relevant public authority, which carries the burden of proof that a
restriction is justified 2309. In response to a request for deletion, a federal law enforcement
authority may, instead of deleting the data, restrict its processing if this is necessary for an
overriding public interest (in particular Swiss internal or external security) or deleting the data
may jeopardise an enquiry,

If an individual is not satisfied with the response to his/her request, (s)he can lodge a
complaint before the FDPIC, which can make use of its different enforcement powers as
described in section 1.2. Moreover, the reply from a federal criminal law enforcement
authority to a request to exercise individual rights constitutes a ”ruling” that can be appealed
before the Federal Administrative Court in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act
(APA) 2310. In particular, an individual may for instance argue that their discretionary powers
have been exceeded or abused, that the decision is inadequate, or that there has been an
incorrect/incomplete determination of the legally relevant facts of the case 2311. The Federal
Administrative Court may amend the contested decision if it violates federal law or is based
on an incorrect or incomplete determination of the facts of the case 2312.

With respect to personal data processed in police information systems or in the context of
international administrative assistance on police matters (within the framework of the
application of the Schengen acquis), individuals are also provided with an indirect avenue to
exercise their rights (introduced in the Swiss legal framework as a result of the
implementation of the Law Enforcement Directive). In particular, while the police may defer
providing access to information processed in police information systems if there are
overriding interests related to criminal prosecution that require maintaining secrecy 2313, it
must notify the individual about his or her right to request the FDPIC to check whether any
data relating to him or her is being processed lawfully and whether overriding interests in

2305
     Articles 25, 37 and 41 FADP 2020
2306
     Article 26(2)(b) FADP 2020.
2307
     Decision of the Federal Supreme Court 4A_125/2020 of 10 December 2020, cons. 3.4.4 and decision of the
Federal Administrative Court A-4725/2020 of 1 February 2023, cons. 8.4.2
2308
     See e.g., decision of the Federal Supreme Court ATF 147 II 408, cons. 2.3 and decisions of the Federal
Administrative Court A-4806/2023 of 2 June 2023, cons. 4.2 and decision A-7307/2008 of 14 April 2009, cons.
6.3; decision of the Federal Court ATF 141 III 119, cons. 7.1.1 and decision of the Federal Administrative Court
A-4725/2020 of 1 February 2023, cons. 7.4.1 and 8.4.
2309
     See e.g., decision of the Federal Administrative Court A-4715/2020 of 23 November 2022, cons. 5.3.3;
decisions A-4277/2021 of 1 February 2023, cons. 5.9 and A-4806/2021 of 2 June 2023, cons. 6.3.
2310
     Article 5 APA.
2311
     Article 49 APA.
2312
     Article 62 APA.
2313
     Article 8(1)(b) Federal Law on the Federal Police Information Systems.

                                                     300
secrecy justify the postponement 2314. Following an audit, the FDPIC informs the individual
(through a standard reply) that either no data about him or her is being processed unlawfully
or that, in the event of errors in the processing of personal data, an investigation under the
FADP 2020 will be opened 2315. If the individual demonstrates that it is likely that the
postponement of the response will seriously and irreparably harm him/her, the FDPIC can
order the police to immediately and exceptionally provide the information requested, provided
that this does not constitute a threat to internal or external security 2316.

Similarly, an individual may request the FDPIC to check whether any data relating to the data
subject is being processed lawfully by competent law enforcement authorities in Switzerland
in the context of administrative assistance on police matters 2317 (i.e., with other Schengen
countries or with non-Schengen countries) if his/her request to obtain access, correction or
deletion is restricted, deferred or refused 2318. After carrying out an audit, the FDPIC informs
the individual (using a standard formulation) that either no data about him or her is being
processed unlawfully or that an investigation under the FADP 2020 has been opened 2319. In
the context of an investigation, the FDPIC can make use of all of its enforcement powers
provided by the FADP 2020.

In addition, individuals are granted rights of access, correction, deletion and objection against
cantonal and communal criminal law enforcement authorities under cantonal data protection
laws, which can be enforced before cantonal data protection authorities and courts.

Second, individuals can lodge complaints before different bodies concerning the processing of
their data by criminal law enforcement authorities under the FADP 2020. Anyone that has a
legitimate interest (i.e., whose data is being processed 2320) may request a criminal law
enforcement authority to (1) stop unlawful processing of personal data, (2) redress the
consequences of the unlawful processing or (3) declare the processing to be unlawful 2321. The
response from a public authority to such a request can be challenged by the individual (e.g.,
arguing that the decision is inadequate or that discretionary powers have been abused) before
the Federal Administrative Court 2322, which may may amend the contested decision if it
violates federal law or is based on an incorrect or incomplete determination of the facts of the
case 2323. Moreover, any individual may lodge a complaint before the FDPIC or cantonal data
protection authorities about compliance with the FADP 2020, data protection provisions in
criminal (procedural) rules (e.g., the Criminal Code, CrimPC), and/or cantonal data protection
rules. The FDPIC and cantonal data protection authorities may make use of all of their various
investigatory and enforcement power, as described in section 1.2. Any decision of the FDPIC


2314
     Article 8(2) Federal Law on the Federal Police Information Systems.
2315
     Article 8(3) Federal Law on the Federal Police Information Systems.
2316
     Article 8(7) Federal Law on the Federal Police Information Systems.
2317
     For instance, if personal data is exchanged in the context of searches of persons or missing objects. Personal
data obtained through other compulsory measures, such as surveillance of communications, is not exchanged in
the context of administrative assistance but under mutual legal assistance legislation/agreements.
2318
     Article 349g(1) Criminal Code.
2319
     Article 349g(3) Criminal Code. This notification may not be contested by the individual (Article 349g(5)
Criminal Code).
2320
     See the case law of the Federal Supreme Court, e.g., TF, 1C_377/2019.
2321
     Article 41 FADP 2020.
2322
     Article 25a(2), in conjunction with Article 5 and 49 APA.
2323
     Article 62 APA.

                                                       301
can be challenged before the Federal Administrative Court, whose decisions can in turn be
challenged before the Federal Supreme Court.

Third, in the context of criminal proceedings, individuals may file an objection before an
“objections authority” 2324 against any “ruling” by the federal police, the public prosecutor,
federal courts of first instance and the Compulsory Measures Court (e.g., on the authorisation
of a search, seizure or collection of communications) 2325. An objection may for instance
concern an infringement of the law (e.g., an unlawful disclosure of personal data, or a
rejection to a request for access to information), including exceeding and abusing
discretionary powers, or a decision that is inequitable 2326. In response to an objection, a court
may inter alia issue a new decision, quash the contested decision, or award reasonable
compensation and reparation (if compulsory measures were applied unlawfully) 2327.

Fourth, any individual that has an interest worthy of protection may request an injunction
from a federal public authority that is responsible for acts based on federal law that affect
rights or obligations (including a criminal law enforcement authority), i.e., that it (1) refrains
from, discontinues or revokes unlawful acts, (2) rectifies the consequences of unlawful acts or
(3) confirms the illegality of such acts 2328. The response from a public authority to such a
request is considered a “ruling” that can be challenged by the individual (e.g., arguing that the
ruling/decision is inadequate or that discretionary powers have been abused) before the
Federal Administrative Court 2329, which may may amend the contested decision if it violates
federal law or is based on an incorrect or incomplete determination of the facts of the case 2330.

Fifth, any individual may obtain compensation for damage caused by federal public
authorities (including criminal law enforcement authorities) on the basis of the Federal Act on
the Liability of the Confederation, Members of its Authorities and Officials 2331. The state will
be held liable for damage caused by an unlawful activity by a civil servant in the performance
of his/her duties, regardless of the culpability of that civil servant 2332. All cantons have
enacted similar laws on state liability 2333.

Finally, after exhausting domestic remedies, any individual may obtain judicial redress before
the European Court of Human Rights concerning the collection and use of their data by Swiss
criminal law enforcement authorities.

       2.3. Access and use by Swiss public authorities for national security purposes


2324
     Article 20 CrimPC. At federal level, this is the Federal Criminal Court (Article 37(1)) Federal Act on the
Organisation of Federal Criminal Authorities). Each canton similarly assigns this role to a court at cantonal level.
2325
     Article 393(1) CrimPC. This possibility is also explicitly provided for in the CrimPC with respect to the
collection of communications, see Article 279(3) CrimPC. In this case, the CrimPC provides that the time limit
for filing an objection (in principle 10 days) only starts to run once the individual is notified of the measure.
2326
     Article 393(2) CrimPC.
2327
     Article 397 and 431(1) CrimPC.
2328
     Article 25a APA.
2329
     Article 25a(2), in conjunction with Article 5 and 49 APA.
2330
     Article 62 APA.
2331
     Article 3 Federal Act on the Liability of the Confederation, Members of its Authorities and Officials.
2332
     Article 3(1) Federal Act on the Liability of the Confederation, Members of its Authorities and Officials.
2333
     See e.g., BS, Law on the Liability of the State and its Personnel of 17 November 1999 or GR, State Liability
Act of 5.12.2006 or FR, Loi sur la responsabilité civile des collectivités publiques et de leurs agents of
16.09.1986).

                                                       302
In Switzerland, the main authority competent to collect personal data for national security
purposes is the Federal Intelligence Service (FIS) 2334. There are no intelligence agencies at
cantonal level, but each canton must designate an authority to work with the FIS, which may
issue assignments to such an authority 2335. The legal framework in which the FIS and cantonal
authorities carrying out national security assignments 2336 operate is laid down in the
Intelligence Service Act (IntelSA), complemented by three Ordinances: the Ordinance on the
Federal Intelligence Service (FISO), the Ordinance on the FIS Information and Storage
Systems (ISSO-FIS) and the Ordinance on the Supervision of Intelligence Activities (OSIA).

         2.3.1. Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

On the basis of the IntelSA, the FIS may access personal data transferred from the EU to
Switzerland (including while in transit) as part of different activities, subject to specific
limitations and safeguards.

The FIS may collect information (including personal data) for the following purposes: (1) the
early recognition and prevention of threats to internal or external security resulting from
certain activities (terrorism; espionage; the proliferation of nuclear, biological or chemical
weapons; violent extremism and attacks on critical infrastructures 2337); (2) to identify, observe
and assess events outside Switzerland that are of security-policy significance; (3) to safeguard
Switzerland’s capacity to act; and (4) to safeguard other important national interests (i.e., the
basis constitutional order in Switzerland; Swiss foreign policy; or Switzerland as a location
for employment, business and finance 2338) in the event of a serious and immediate threat,
where the Federal Council has issued a specific mandate to do so 2339. The FIS may not gather
or process any information relating to political activities or the exercises of freedom of
speech, assembly or association in Switzerland except if there are specific indications that a




2334
     In addition, the Swiss army has an intelligence service – the Army Intelligence Service (AIS) – that may
search for and evaluate information about foreign countries that is of importance to the army, in particular from
the perspective of national defence, peace promotion and foreign support (e.g., providing humanitarian aid), see
Article 99(1) Army Act. The AIS may process personal data necessary for an engagement of the army for
specific purposes, i.e., to protect military personnel, infrastructure and sources from activities that pose a threat
to security; to verify access to information necessary for the performance of its tasks; or to recognise events
abroad that are important for Switzerland’s security policy (Article 8 Ordinance on the Army Intelligence
Service). To carry out its mission, the AIS may use radio exploration, in accordance with the Intelligence Service
Act and its accompanying Ordinances (Article 99(1bis) Army Act), see in more detail below. The AIS does not
carry out cable intelligence. The activities of the AIS are subject to oversight by the same bodies as those that
supervise the FIS (see below).
2335
     Article 9 IntelSA. Such assignments are issued in writing. To carry out an assignment, the cantons may
collect personal data to be shared with the FIS but may not establish their own databases to process data under
the IntelSA (Article 46 and 85 IntelSA). The FIS is responsible for ensuring proper internal oversight within the
cantons when they carry out tasks under the IntelSA (Article 75 IntelSA). When carrying out tasks under the
IntelSA, cantonal authorities are also subject to independent oversight by specialised federal administrative and
parliamentary bodies, see in more detail section 2.3.3. In addition, the cantons may establish their own
supervisory authorities competent to oversee compliance with the IntelSA (Article 82 IntelSA).
2336
     Further references to the FIS in this section also include cantonal authorities carrying out an assignment for
the FIS.
2337
     I.e., information, communication, energy, transport and other infrastructures that are essential for the proper
functioning of society, the economy and the state (Article 6(1)(a)(4) IntelSA).
2338
     See Article 6(1)(d) in conjunction with Article 3 IntelSA.
2339
     Article 6(1) IntelSA.

                                                        303
person is exercising these rights in order to prepare for or carry out terrorist, espionage or
violent activities 2340.

As a general principle applicable to all FIS collection activities, the IntelSA provides that, in
each case, the FIS must choose the measure that (1) is most suitable and necessary for
achieving a specific information gathering objective and (2) causes the least interference with
the fundamental rights of the persons concerned 2341.

The FIS may collect information (including personal data) in Switzerland without specific
external authorisation when gathering it from public sources, carrying out observations in
public and generally accessible places, or when using human sources as well as in cases of
issuing alerts regarding individuals and property 2342. By contrast, the following information
gathering measures require prior authorisation: surveillance of post and
telecommunications 2343; the use of special technical devices to monitor telecommunications,
record transmissions or identify a person/object or ascertain their location (which may only be
carried out if other surveillance techniques have been unsuccessful, would be without
prospect of success or would be unreasonably difficult); the use of localisation devices; the
use of monitoring devices to listen to and record conversations in non-public places; the
intrusion into computer systems and networks; and the search of premises, vehicles or storage
facilities 2344.

Such measures may only be carried out if there is a specific threat to the internal or external
security of Switzerland 2345, the seriousness of the threat justifies the measure, and intelligence
investigations so far have been unsuccessful or would be without prospect of success or
unreasonably difficult 2346. In terms of procedural safeguards, the FIS must first obtain
authorisation of the Federal Administrative Court and, subsequently, clearance of the Head of
the Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sport (DDPS) 2347. An authorisation
of the Court is valid for a maximum of three months and can be extended by a further Federal



2340
     Article 5(5)-(6) IntelSA.
2341
     Article 5(2) IntelSA.
2342
     Articles 13-16 IntelSA. See also Annual Report 2022 of the Independent Oversight Authority for Intelligence
Activities OA-IA, p. 12
2343
     Article 26 IntelSA. For the surveillance of post and telecommunications, the FIS also relies on the assistance
of the PTSS, as is the case for criminal law enforcement authorities (see section 2.2.1).
2344
     Article 26(1) IntelSA.
2345
     I.e., if a significant legal interest such as the life and limb or the liberty of persons or the existence and
functioning of the state is affected and the threat comes from terrorism, espionage, anti-bribery and corruption
proliferation or the illegal trade in radioactive substances, ware material and other armaments, or an attack on
critical infrastructure. In addition, in the event of a serious and immediate threat, this may, when mandated by
the Federal Council, include the protection of the basis constitutional order in Switzerland, the support of Swiss
foreign policy or the protection of Switzerland as a location for employment, business and finance. See Article
27(1)(a), in conjunction with Article 19(2)(a)-(d) and 3 IntelSA.
2346
     Article 27(1) IntelSA. These measures may be used against a third party if there is reason to believe that the
person from whom the information will be gathered is using premises, vehicles or storage facilities belonging to
the third party or is using the third party’s postal addresses, telecommunication connection points, computer
systems or computer networks in order to transmit, receive or store information (Article 28(1) IntelSA).
2347
     Article 27(2) IntelSA. An application for an authorisation from the Federal Administrative Court must inter
alia contain a reasoning on why the abovementioned standard is considered to be met; details of the persons that
will be affected; a precise description of the measure; and information on the timeframe for carrying out the
measure (Article 29(1) IntelSA). The authorisation issued by the Federal Administrative Court must contain a
brief statement of reasons and may impose further conditions (Article 29(2) IntelSA).

                                                       304
Administrative Court authorisation 2348. Once a measure has been authorised by the Court, the
Head of the DDPS, after consulting in writing with the Head of the Federal Department of
Foreign Affairs (FDFA) and the Head of the Federal Justice and Police Department (FDJP)
decides on the clearance for the measure to be carried out 2349.

In cases of urgency, the FIS may order the immediate use of information gathering measures
requiring authorisation but must immediately inform the Federal Administrative Court and the
DDPS, both of which may terminate the measure with immediate effect 2350. An application
for authorisation must in this case be filed before the Court within 24 hours and must include
an explanation of the reasons for the urgency 2351. If the measure is authorised by the Court,
the DDPS, after consulting the FDFA and the FDJP, decides on clearance for the measure to
be continued 2352. Any information gathering measure requiring authorisation must
immediately be terminated if the authorisation period expires, the requirements for the
measure are no longer fulfilled, or authorisation/clearance is not granted 2353. In case of the use
of urgency measures, the FIS is required to ensure immediate destruction of the collected
information if an application for a measure is rejected by the Federal Administrative Court or
the Head of the DDPS terminates the measure or refuses clearance for continuation 2354.

In terms of additional safeguards, the IntelSA requires the FIS to notify the individual whose
information was collected within one month after the conclusion of the intelligence operation
of the reason for, nature and duration of the measure 2355. Such notification may be postponed
or dispensed with if necessary to avoid jeopardising an ongoing information gathering
measure or ongoing legal proceedings; if necessary due to another overriding public interest
to safeguard internal or external security or Swiss or foreign relations; if the notification could
cause serious danger to third parties; or if the concerned individual cannot be contacted 2356.
However, such a postponing or dispensing with notification must be authorised by the Federal
Administrative Court and cleared by the DDPS in accordance with the abovementioned
procedure 2357. More generally, the FIS is required to keep written documentation on each
information gathering measure, which must inter alia contain information on the authorisation
and clearance, when the measure ended, as well as the notification (and/or postponing
of/dispensing with such notification) 2358.

The IntelSA also provides the FIS with a legal basis to collect information about events
outside of Switzerland 2359. In this case, the FIS must ensure that the risk following from the

2348
     Article 29(6)-(7) IntelSA.
2349
     Article 30 IntelSA.
2350
     Article 31(1) IntelSA.
2351
     Article 31(2) IntelSA.
2352
     Article 31(4) IntelSA.
2353
     Section 32(1) IntelSA.
2354
     Article 32(2) IntelSA.
2355
     Article 33(1) IntelSA.
2356
     Article 33(2) IntelSA.
2357
     Article 33(3) IntelSA.
2358
     Article 22 FISO.
2359
     Article 36(1) IntelSA. Pursuant to Article 37 IntelSA, the FIS may also intrude into computer systems and
networks located outside of Switzerland (to disrupt, prevent or slow down access to information) where those are
used to carry out attacks on critical infrastructures in Switzerland. In addition, the FIS may intrude into such
systems/networks to gather information about events outside Switzerland that is available there or that has been
transmitted from there. Such measures must be authorised by the Head of the DDPS (after consulting the Heads

                                                     305
information gathering is not disproportionate to the expected benefit and that interference
with the fundamental rights of the persons concerned can be limited to what is necessary 2360.

The FIS may obtain cable communication intelligence (e.g., internet traffic transmitted by
international telecommunications cables, such as emails, internet telephony, etc.) in order to
gather information about events outside Switzerland that are of significance to security and, in
the event of a serious and immediate threat and in accordance with a mandate issued by the
Federal Council, to safeguard important national interests (the protection of the basic
constitutional order in Switzerland, supporting Swiss foreign policy and the protection of
Switzerland as a location for employment, business and finance) 2361. The purposes for which
such collection may take place are further specified in the FISO, which clarifies that the
collection of cable communications may be carried out in specific fields: terrorism (e.g., to
identify activities, lines and structures of terrorist groups), proliferation (e.g., to identify
weapons of mass destruction programmes), counter-espionage (to identify activities and
structures of foreign state or non-state actors), foreign actions and motives directed against
Switzerland and foreign acts or conflicts affecting Switzerland (e.g., to assess the security
situation or stability of the concerned foreign regimes), and cyber threat exploration and
critical infrastructure protection 2362.

The recording of cross-border signals from cable-based networks is done by the Centre for
Electronic Operations (CEO) of the Swiss Armed Forces 2363, upon a mandate issued by the
FIS. To issue a mandate for cable communications intelligence, the FIS must obtain
authorisation from the Federal Administrative Court, as well as a clearance from the Head of
the DDPS (who must in turn consult in writing the Heads of the FDFA and FDJP) 2364. An
authorisation from the Court is valid for a maximum of six months and may be extended by
another Court authorisation for a maximum of three months 2365. In cases of urgency, the same
procedure as the one described above for issuing/authorising urgent information gathering
measures in Switzerland applies 2366. The CEO may only pass recorded signals on to the FIS if
the content corresponds to the search parameters defined for the operation, which must be
defined in such a way that their application causes as little interference as possible in the
private life of persons 2367. Search terms may for instance be the names of legal or natural




of the FDFA and FDJP). A request for authorisation must be in writing and inter alia set out the type of
information sought through the measure, the period during which the measure would take place, as well as the
necessity, proportionality and risks of the measure, see Article 24(1) FISO. The FIS must document the
implementation, results and termination of an authorised measure (Article 24(4) FISO).
2360
     Article 36(3) IntelSA.
2361
     Article 39(1) IntelSA, in conjunction with Article 6(1)(b) and Article 3 IntelSA.
2362
     Article 25 FISO.
2363
     Article 26 FISO.
2364
     Article 40 IntelSA, Article 41(2) IntelSA, in conjunction with Article 30 IntelSA. The application for an
authorisation from the Court must inter alia contain the reasons why the operation is necessary, details of the
categories of search parameters, and details of the operators of cable-based networks and telecommunication
services providers that must supply the information (Article 41(1) IntelSA). The Court issues an authorisation
with a brief statement of reasons and may impose additional conditions (Article 41(2), in conjunction with
Article 29(3) and (5) IntelSA).
2365
     Article 41(3) IntelSA.
2366
     See Article 41(2) IntelSA, in conjunction with Article 31 IntelSA.
2367
     Article 39(3) IntelSA. Details of Swiss natural or legal persons are not permitted as search parameters.

                                                     306
persons, telephone numbers, IP addresses, etc. 2368. The CEO receives signals from operators
of cable-based networks and telecommunication service providers, who are obliged to provide
the relevant information 2369, converts them into data and assesses on the basis of the content
which data meets a search parameter and therefore has to be passed on to the FIS 2370. If the
data contains information about events in Switzerland or abroad that provides evidence of a
specific threat to internal security (e.g., terrorism, espionage, the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction), the data is passed unchanged to the FIS 2371. The CEO must destroy data
that does not contain any relevant information as quickly as possible 2372.

In addition to conducting cable communication intelligence, the FIS may carry out radio
communication intelligence (i.e., recording electro-magnetic emissions from
telecommunication systems located abroad, in practice relating primarily to
telecommunication satellites and shortwave transmitters 2373) 2374. This type of collection may
be used to gather information about events outside Switzerland that are of significance to
security or in the event of a serious and immediate threat and in accordance with a mandate
issued by the Federal Council, to safeguard important national interests (the protection of the
basic constitutional order in Switzerland, supporting Swiss foreign policy and the protection
of Switzerland as a location for employment, business and finance) 2375. The purposes for
which such collection may take place are further specified in the Ordinance on Electronic
Warfare and Radio Exploration, which clarifies that radio exploration may be carried out in
specific fields: terrorism (e.g., to identify activities, lines and structures of terrorist groups),
proliferation (e.g., to identify weapons of mass destruction programmes), counter-espionage
(to identify activities and structures of foreign state or non-state actors), foreign conflicts
affecting Switzerland (e.g., to assess the security the security situation or stability of regimes),
army and armaments (e.g., to recognise actual or potential military conflicts), the engagement
of the Swiss Armed Forces 2376.

While the use of these measures does not require prior authorisation by a court, each
mandate 2377 for radio communication intelligence must be reported to an independent
oversight body, the Independent Control Authority for Radio and Cable Communications
Intelligence, which verifies the legality of radio communication intelligence mandates on an
annual basis 2378. The Authority may carry out audits, issue recommendations, and request the


2368
        See     the    Explanatory     Report    on     the    revision   of    the    IntelSA,    available    at:
https://www.fedlex.admin.ch/filestore/fedlex.data.admin.ch/eli/dl/proj/2022/15/cons_1/doc_4/de/pdf-a/fedlex-
data-admin-ch-eli-dl-proj-2022-15-cons_1-doc_4-de-pdf-a.pdf.
2369
     Article 43 IntelSA.
2370
     Article 42(1) IntelSA.
2371
     Article 42(3) IntelSA, in conjunction with Article 6(1)(a) IntelSA.
2372
     Article 42(4) IntelSA.
2373
      See the FIS’ annual report 2023 (“Switzerland’s security 2023”), p. 83, available at:
https://www.newsd.admin.ch/newsd/message/attachments/80146.pdf.
2374
     The Armed Forces Intelligence Service may also carry out radio communication intelligence, under the same
conditions as the FIS (i.e., following from the IntelSA, Ordinance on Electronic Warfare and Radio Exploration
and OSIA) and subject to the same oversight by the Independent Control Authority. See Article 99(1bis) Army
Act.
2375
     Article 38(2) IntelSA.
2376
     Article 3 Ordinance on Electronic Warfare and Radio Exploration.
2377
     A mandate to carry out radio exploration must be issued in writing, define the purpose of the exploration and
the results to be obtained (Article 3(4) Ordinance on Electronic Warfare and Radio Exploration).
2378
     Article 10(2) OSIA.

                                                       307
termination of radio communication intelligence as well as the deletion of collected
information 2379. More information on the Authority and its oversight powers is provided in
section 2.3.3.

According to its annual report 2023, the FIS used 92 information gathering measures
(affecting 26 individuals in total), issued three cable communication intelligence orders, and
issued 30 radio communication intelligence orders, in 2022 2380.

Finally, the FIS may obtain data from other public authorities (at federal and cantonal level),
which are either, under certain conditions, obliged to disclose information to the FIS upon its
request, or are allowed to voluntarily share information, again under specific conditions. Such
authorities are obliged to respond to a justified request 2381 from the FIS with information
required to identify or repel a specific threat to internal or external security 2382 or to safeguard
other important national interests 2383. With some exceptions, public authorities may (but are
not required to) share information with the FIS on their own initiative if the same conditions
are met 2384. Some authorities (e.g., courts, prosecution authorities, customs authorities,
authorities responsible for diplomatic and consular matters, authorities receiving reports of
money laundering and terrorist financing) are obliged to proactively report to the FIS if they
identify a specific and serious threat to internal or external security 2385.

         2.3.2. Further use of the information collected

The processing of personal data by intelligence agencies is first of all subject to specific data
protection obligations following from the IntelSA and its accompanying ordinances 2386.

The FIS operates different information systems (e.g., for information about violent extremism,
information that only initiates administrative processes, data from publicly accessible sources,
etc.) 2387 and the IntelSA establishes for each of those systems how collected data may be


2379
     Article 79(3) IntelSA, Article 9(1) OSIA.
2380
     See Switzerland's Security 2023 – Situation. Report of the Federal Intelligence Service 2023, p. 82.
2381
     In particular, the request must explain the concrete threat or the important national interest to be protected,
see Article 20(1) FISO.
2382
     Such a threat exists if a significant legal interest such as the life and limb or the liberty of persons or the
existence and functioning of the state is affected and the threat results from, inter alia, terrorist activities,
espionage, an attack on critical infrastructure or violent extremism (Article 19(2) IntelSA).
2383
     I.e., the basic constitutional order in Switzerland; Swiss foreign policy; or Switzerland as a location for
employment, business and finance, where this is determined by the Federal Council (Article 19(1) in conjunction
with Article 3 IntelSA).
2384
     Article 19(4) IntelSA.
2385
     Article 20 IntelSA.
2386
     The processing of personal data by other authorities that are required to assist the FIS in the collection of
information, i.e. the PTSS (for the surveillance of telecommunications) and the CEO (for radio and cable
exploration), is also subject to the FADP 2020, as well as specific data protection rules (e.g., data retention
periods laid down in Article 28 FISO, Article 11 SPTA and Article 4 Ordinance on Electronic Warfare and
Radio Exploration). As regards the processing of personal data by the Army Intelligence Service, specific data
protection requirements follow from the Army Act and the Ordinance on the Army Intelligence Service. These
instruments for instance lay down the specific purposes for which the AIS may process personal data and
regulate the sharing of data with other entities (the AIS may communicate personal data to federal and cantonal
services, as well as foreign authorities, if such communication is required for the execution of a lawful mandate
or if the processing of the data falls within the legal competence of the receiving service (Article 10 Ordinance
on the Army Intelligence Service)). In addition, the FADP 2020 applies, see the information provided in section
2.2.2).
2387
     Article 48 IntelSA.

                                                       308
used. In particular, it provides for each system which information must be recorded 2388, for
which purposes and which employees/entities can access and search the information 2389. In
accordance with the IntelSA, the FIS must assess the relevance and accuracy of personal data
before recording it in its information systems and destroy any data that is not necessary to
fulfil its tasks as set out in the Act 2390. The FIS must correct or delete any incorrect data and
periodically check whether personal data recorded in its information systems is still required
to carry out its tasks (and if not delete such data) 2391. In addition, the FIS is required to, inter
alia, verify by random sample the legality, expediency, effectiveness and accuracy of the data
processing in all of the FIS’ information systems 2392. Moreover, the ISSO-FIS imposes the
principle of data security, including by referring to obligations under the FADP 2020 2393.

Data collected through information gathering measures that require court authorisation (e.g.,
the content of communications collected through interception) must initially be stored
separately from other information systems 2394. Only FIS employees that have the task of
carrying out the information gathering measure and evaluating the results have access to such
data 2395. Any personal data obtained through such measures that is not related to the specific
threat situation for which the measure was taken may not be used and must be destroyed at the
latest 30 days after conclusion of the measure 2396. Personal data related to specific threat
situations that is not used in legal proceedings or an ongoing intelligence operation must be
deleted (1) within six months after the notification of the measure to the data subject
concerned (including where such notification is postponed); (2) immediately after the entry
into force of a court decision on dispensing with the obligation to notify the individual; or (3)
immediately after the entry into force of a decision on an appeal against the measure
ordered 2397. If such data is used in an intelligence operation, it is recorded in one of the FIS’
information systems and subject to the specific requirements applying to that system. The
ISSO-FIS lays down specific maximum retention periods depending on each system, with
periods varying from 2 (e.g., for data from public sources) to 45 years (e.g., for data relevant
to national security) 2398.

As a general requirement, before disclosing personal data to any other entity (whether in
Switzerland or outside), the FIS must ensure that the disclosure is lawful and necessary in a
specific case 2399. The FIS may only disclose personal data to other Swiss authorities if this is
necessary to safeguard internal or external security 2400, unless doing so would be contrary to
overriding public or private interests 2401. The FIS may share data with other authorities for the

2388
     See also the annexes to the ISSO-FIS, which detail for each information system which categories of
(personal) data may be recorded.
2389
     Chapter 4, Section 2 IntelSA. More detailed requirements on the granting of access rights are laid down in
Article 5-6 ISSO-FIS.
2390
     Article 45(1)-(2) IntelSA. See also Articles 3-4 ISSO-FIS.
2391
     Article 45(4) IntelSA.
2392
     Article 45(5) IntelSA.
2393
     Article 13 ISSO-FIS.
2394
     Article 58(1) IntelSA.
2395
     Article 58(3) IntelSA.
2396
     Article 58(2) IntelSA.
2397
     Article 70 ISSO-FIS.
2398
     A8(2) ISSO-FIS and the specific provisions mentioned there.
2399
     Article 59 IntelSA.
2400
     Article 60(1) IntelSA.
2401
     Article 32(4) FISO.

                                                     309
use of the prosecution of offences, prevention of serious offences or maintaining public order,
upon their request or on its own initiative 2402. It is always required to disclose data obtained
through measures requiring authorisation to a prosecution authority if the information
contains specific evidence of an offence in connection with the prosecution of which the
prosecution authority would have been entitled to order a comparable criminal procedural
measure 2403. Any sharing of personal data with other authorities must be recorded in writing
by the FIS, including the recipient, the object and the reason for the sharing 2404. The
authorities with which personal data may be shared and the purposes for which such sharing
may take place are listed in Annex 3 to the FISO, and for instance includes criminal
prosecution authorities at federal and cantonal level, the Federal Department of Foreign
Affairs (e.g., for the assessment of the threat situation and the security policy interests of
Switzerland), the Federal Department of Home Affairs (e.g., for the enforcement of
legislation on narcotics), etc.

Personal data processed by the FIS may only be disclosed to a foreign authority if it is in a
country that guarantees an adequate level of data protection under the FADP 2020, or, if that
is not the case, only if Switzerland maintains diplomatic relations with the relevant country
and (1) Switzerland is required by law or by an international agreement to disclose the
personal data to the state; (2) disclosure is required to safeguard an overriding public security
interest in Switzerland or in the receiving state (such as preventing a serious criminal offence
that is also qualified as such in Switzerland); (3) it is necessary in order to justify a request for
information from Switzerland; (4) it is in the interest of the person concerned, who has
consented to disclosure or consent may be clearly assumed in the circumstances or (5) it is
necessary in order to protect the life and limb of third parties 2405. The possibility of access
online to personal data is limited to foreign security agencies whose states benefit from an
adequacy decision and with which Switzerland has concluded an international agreement on
international cooperation 2406. Personal data may not be disclosed to a foreign security agency
if the person concerned will be exposed to the risk of being punished twice or of serious harm
to his or her life, limb or freedom under the ECHR or other international agreements that
Switzerland has ratified 2407. For each disclosure to a foreign authority, the FIS must inform
the addressee of the purpose for which the latter is exclusively authorised to use the data and
the fact that the FIS reserves the right to request information on such use 2408. The FIS must
keep documentation on each disclosure, the subject thereof and the recipient 2409.

Finally, the FIS may disclose personal data to other third parties only if the individual
concerned has consented to the disclosure; if the disclosure is indisputably in the interest of
the individual; if the disclosure is necessary in order to repel a serious immediate danger; or if
it is necessary in order to justify a request for information 2410.


2402
     Article 60(2) IntelSA.
2403
     Article 60(3) IntelSA.
2404
     Article 32(3) FISO.
2405
     Article 61(1) IntelSA.
2406
     Article 61(4) IntelSA.
2407
     Article 61(5) IntelSA.
2408
     Article 35(5) FISO.
2409
     Article 35(6) FISO.
2410
     Article 62 IntelSA.

                                                310
To the extent that the IntelSA and other laws/ordinances to do not provide specific data
processing rules, the FADP 2020 applies (see the information provided in section 2.2.2) 2411.

         2.3.3. Oversight

The activities of the FIS are supervised by different bodies.

First, the FDPIC oversees compliance of data processing by the FIS with the FADP 2020 and
other federal data protection requirements (in particular those following from the IntelSA and
its accompanying Ordinances) 2412. In carrying out this task, the FDPIC makes use of all of its
powers, as described in section 1.2, including to adopt binding decisions.

Second, the activities of the FIS and cantonal authorities to whom the FIS has delegated tasks
are supervised by the Independent Oversight Authority for Intelligence Activities (OA-
IA) 2413. In carrying out its tasks, it has access to all relevant information and documents, as
well as the premises of the FIS/cantonal authorities and their information systems 2414. The
OA-IA may audit these activities to confirm their legality, expediency and effectiveness 2415.
Following an audit, the OA-IA provides the DDPS with a written report, which may include
recommendations 2416. The DDPS is required to implement such recommendations and must
submit any recommendation it intends to reject to the Federal Council for a decision 2417.
According to information received from the Swiss government, all recommendations from
OA-IA have so far been implemented. According to its annual reports, the OA-IA issued 55
recommendations in 2020, 18 recommendations in 2021 and 13 recommendations in 20222418.
In 2022, the OA-IA for instance conducted audits of the information gathering management
by the FIS, as well as the collection of information from telecommunication providers 2419.

Third, the use of radio and cable communications intelligence is, in addition to the
supervision by the OA-IA, also subject to oversight by a separate independent body – the
Independent Control Authority (ICA) 2420. The ICA is in charge of verifying the legality of
radio communication intelligence and supervising the conduct of authorised and cleared cable


2411
     The same applies to the Army Intelligence Service.
2412
     Article 4(1) FADP 2020. The Army Intelligence Service is also subject to the oversight of the FDPIC.
2413
     The IntelSA provides that the OA-IA carries out its task independently, free from any instructions from other
authorities, with its own budget and staff, while being assigned to the DDPS for administrative purposes (Article
76(1), Article 77 IntelSA). The head of the OA-IA is appointed by the Federal Council upon a proposal from the
DDPS for a renewable period of six years (Article 76(2)-(5) IntelSA). The Federal Council may remove the head
from the post only if (s)he breaches his official duties wilfully or through gross negligence or becomes
permanently incapable of exercising office. The Army Intelligence Service is also subject to the oversight of the
OA-IA, see Article 99(5) Army Act.
2414
     Article 78(4) IntelSA.
2415
     Article 78(1) IntelSA.
2416
     Article 78(6) IntelSA.
2417
     Article 78(7) IntelSA.
2418
     See the annual reports available at: https://www.ab-nd.admin.ch/en/jahresbericht-ab-nd.html.
2419
     Annual report 2022 of the Independent Oversight Authority for Intelligence Activities OA-IA, available at:
https://ab-nd-taetigkeitsbericht.ch/en/.
2420
     Article 79 IntelSA. The ICA consists of three to five members appointed for a term of four years by the
Federal Council (on the proposal of the DDPS), which must have expertise in the fields of telecommunications,
security policy and the protection of fundamental rights (Article 79(4) IntelSA, Article 7 OSIA). The ICA acts
independently and is not bound by directives/instructions from other authorities (Article 79(1) IntelSA). Radio
exploration carried out by the Army Intelligence Service is also subject to the oversight of the ICA, Article
99(1bis) Army Act

                                                      311
communications intelligence assignments given to the CEO 2421. In particular, it may review
cable network exploration applications, approval and validation decisions, analyse the results
obtained via radio and cable exploration, annually verify radio exploration mandates, etc. 2422.
To carry out its oversight activities, it has access to all relevant information and facilities2423.
In addition, the intelligence services must notify the ICA of every new radio or cable
intelligence order and must provide the ICA with an updated and complete list of all
keywords used and inform the ICA of completion of mandates 2424. The ICA lay issue
recommendations, request that radio communications intelligence assignments are terminated,
and that collected information is deleted 2425.

Finally, intelligence services are also subject to parliamentary oversight by the CDel 2426 of the
Federal Assembly, which oversees the legality, expediency and effectiveness of activities of
the intelligence services 2427. In carrying out its oversight tasks, the CDel has unrestricted
access to information, including secret intelligence information 2428. According to the “Action
principles of the Control Delegation” developed by the CDel itself 2429, it may request reports
from the intelligence services, carry out regular inspections/investigations and on-site visit,
etc. As a result of an investigation, the CDel can issue recommendations addressed to the
relevant intelligence service 2430. The CDel also publishes the annual report 2431. In 2019, the
CDel concluded an investigation on the basis of a petition from an NGO, in which it included
several recommendations on the processing of data by the FIS in different databases and the
impact thereof on the possibility for individuals to exercise their right of access, as well as
applicable retention periods 2432.

        2.3.4. Redress

The Swiss system provides different avenues to obtain redress, including compensation for
damages.

First, individuals can invoke different rights against the FIS 2433. The IntelSA specifically
regulates the exercise of the right of access with respect to data processed for national security
purposes 2434 (as regards data processed by the FIS for administrative or other purposes not
related to national security, the IntelSA specifies that the FADP 2020 applies 2435). The FIS

2421
     Article 79(1) IntelSA.
2422
     Article 10 OSIA.
2423
     Article 79(2) IntelSA.
2424
     Article 9(1) OSIA.
2425
     Article 79(3) IntelSA.
2426
     The Army Intelligence Service is also subject to the oversight by the CDel, see Article 99(5) Army Act.
2427
     Article 52(2) Act on the Federal Assembly.
2428
     See Article 169(2) of the Federal Constitution, which provides that secrecy rules do not apply to special
delegations of supervisory committees established by law.
2429
        Principes d’action de la Délégation des Commissions de gestion, avalable at :
https://www.parlament.ch/centers/documents/fr/gpdel-handlungsgrundsaetze-f.pdf.
2430
     Article 158 Act on the Federal Assembly.
2431
      See 2003 Report, available at: https://www.parlament.ch/press-releases/Pages/2013/mm-gpdel-2013-09-
05.aspx.
2432
     Rapport annuel 2019 des Commissions de gestion et de la Délégation des Commissions de gestion des
Chambres fédérales, p. 2939.
2433
     With respect to data processed by the Army Intelligence Service, individuals can exercise the rights under
the FAPD 2020, as described in section 1.1 and below.
2434
     Article 63(2) IntelSA.
2435
     Article 63(1) IntelSA.

                                                     312
will defer its response (through a standard notification) (1) if and to the extent that there are
overriding interests that justify preserving secrecy that are connected with the fulfilment of
the FIS’ intelligence tasks or a prosecution or other investigation; (2) if and to the extent that
it is required because of overriding interests of third parties; or (3) if no data about the
individual is being processed 2436. As soon as there are no longer overriding interests in
preserving secrecy and at the latest on expiry of the applicable data retention period, the FIS
must provide the individual with the information required under the FADP 2020 in response
to access requests, unless this would involve excessive work and expense 2437. According to its
annual report, the FIS received a total of 675 access requests (under the IntelSA and the
FADP) in 2022. In 594 cases, the individuals were provided with the relevant information in
response to their requests, whereas the answer was deferred in 50 cases, in accordance with
the criteria of the IntelSA 2438.

If the response is deferred, the FIS must inform the individual that he or she has the right to
request the FDPIC to examine whether the data, if any, is being lawfully processed and
whether overriding interests in preserving secrecy justify the deferral 2439. Upon request from
an individual, the FDPIC conducts an examination and informs the individual (through a
standard notification) that either (1) no data is being processed unlawfully in relation to him
or (2) that the FDPIC has found errors in the processing of the data/regarding the
postponement of the information and has opened an investigation pursuant to the FAPD
2020 2440. In the context of an investigation, the FDPIC can make use of its different
investigatory and enforcement powers foreseen in the FADP 2020. In addition, the IntelSA
provides that the FDPIC may order the FIS to rectify any errors in the processing of data or
regarding the postponement of the reply to the individual 2441. Moreover, if an individual
credibly demonstrates that (s)he will suffer significant irreparable damage by postponing the
disclosure of information in response to an access request, the FDPIC may order the FIS to
immediately provide the information, provided that this does not endanger internal or external
security 2442.

In addition to a right of access, individuals also have a right of correction, erasure and a right
to object with respect to personal data processed by the FIS, pursuant to the FADP 2020. In
response to a request for deletion, the FIS may, instead of deleting the data, restrict its
processing if this is necessary for an overriding public interest (in particular Swiss internal or
external security) or deleting the data may jeopardise an enquiry, investigation or
administrative/judicial procedure 2443.

As regards the processing of personal data by cantonal bodies, when they are carrying tasks in
the area of national security, individuals are granted rights of access, correction, deletion and


2436
     Article 63(2) IntelSA. The FIS is required to notify individuals whose data is not being processed of this fact
no later than three years after receipt of their request (Article 63(5) IntelSA).
2437
     Article 63(4) IntelSA.
2438
     Switzerland’s security 2023, p. 86, available at: https://www.admin.ch/gov/en/start/documentation/media-
releases.msg-id-95984.html.
2439
     Article 63(3) IntelSA.
2440
     Article 64(1)-(2) IntelSA. This notification cannot be contested by the individual (Article 66(2) IntelSA).
2441
     Article 64(4) IntelSA.
2442
     Article 64(5) IntelSA.
2443
     Article 41(3)(c) FADP 2020.

                                                       313
objection under cantonal data protection laws, which can be enforced before cantonal data
protection authorities and courts 2444.

Second, individuals can lodge complaints before different bodies concerning the (unlawful)
processing of their data by intelligence under the FADP 2020. Anyone that has a legitimate
interest (i.e., whose data is being processed 2445) may request a national security authority to
(1) stop unlawful processing of personal data, (2) redress the consequences of the unlawful
processing or (3) declare the processing to be unlawful 2446. The response from a public
authority to such a request is considered a “ruling” that can be challenged by the individual
(e.g., arguing that the ruling/decision is inadequate or that discretionary powers have been
abused) before the Federal Administrative Court 2447, which may amend the contested decision
if it violates federal law or is based on an incorrect or incomplete determination of the facts of
the case 2448. Moreover, any individual may lodge a complaint before the FDPIC about
compliance with the FADP 2020 and data protection provisions in the IntelSA and
accompanying ordinances. The FDPIC may make use of all of its various investigatory and
enforcement power, as described in section 1.2.

Third, under the same conditions as explained in section 2.2.4, any individual that has an
interest worthy of protection may request an injunction from an intelligence authority, whose
response can be challenged by the individual before the Federal Administrative Court (whose
decisions can in turn be appealed before the Federal Supreme Court) 2449. In this respect, a
Supreme Court judgment has for instance clarified that, because surveillance measures in the
context of radio and cable intelligence are secret and individuals are not able to demonstrate
that they are individually affected (and therefore cannot establish a legal interest to challenge
an individual surveillance measure), a complainant is considered to have such a legal interest
if there is a sufficient probability (i.e., a “reasonable likelihood”, interpreted in accordance
with the standard developed by the ECtHR) that the FIS processes their data in the context of
radio and cable intelligence 2450.

Fourth, under the same conditions as explained in section 2.2.4, any individual may obtain
compensation for damage caused by federal public authorities (including criminal law
enforcement authorities) on the basis of the Federal Act on the Liability of the Confederation,
Members of its Authorities and Officials 2451.

Finally, after exhausting domestic remedies, any individual may obtain judicial redress before
the European Court of Human Rights concerning the collection and use of their data by Swiss
intelligence agencies.




2444
     Since the data is processed on behalf of the FIS (tasks in the area of national security), the FIS is the data
controller and the provisions of the IntelSA, notably Art. 63, also apply.
2445
     See the case law of the Federal Supreme Court, e.g., TF, 1C_377/2019.
2446
     Article 41 FADP 2020.
2447
     Article 25a(2), in conjunction with Article 5 and 49 APA.
2448
     Article 62 APA.
2449
     Article 25a(2), in conjunction with Article 5 and 49 APA; Article 83(1) IntelSA.
2450
     Supreme Court judgment in case TF, 1C_377/2019. See in particular para. 7.2.2 and the cross-reference to
para. 122 of the ECtHR Kennedy judgment.
2451
     Article 3 Federal Act on the Liability of the Confederation, Members of its Authorities and Officials.

                                                       314
                             XI. EASTERN REPUBLIC OF URUGUAY

1. RULES APPLYING TO THE PROCESSING OF PERSONAL DATA

       1.1. Relevant developments in the data protection framework of Uruguay

On 21 August 2012, the Commission adopted a decision in which Uruguay was considered
providing an adequate level of protection for personal data 2452. The Article 29 Working Party
had adopted a positive opinion on the level of protection of personal data in Uruguay on 12
October 2010 2453. At the time of the adoption of the adequacy decision, the protection of
personal data in Uruguay was governed by the Law 18.331 on the Protection of Personal Data
and the Habeas Data Action 2008 2454 (Ley de Protección de Datos Personales, LPDP) and
Decree No. 414/009 Regulating Law 18.331 Relating to the Protection of Personal Data2455
(Reglamentación de la ley 18.331, relativa a la Protección de Datos Personales, RPDP).

Since the adoption of the adequacy decision, certain specific aspects of the LPDP were
amended in 2012 2456 and 2015 2457. In 2018 Uruguay started a legislative process for a more
comprehensive modernisation and strengthening of its data protection regime, taking
inspiration from Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR) 2458. As described in more detail below,
the territorial scope of the data protection legislation was broadened and new accountability
requirements were introduced, including impact assessments and data protection by design
and by default, data breach notification and the appointment of data protection officers. These
new provisions were introduced by Law No. 19.670 on Accountability and Budgetary
Execution Balance Exercise 2017 2459 that the Parliament of Uruguay passed in October 2018.
The Law entered into force in January 2019 and has been further developed through a decree
published in February 2020 2460. Further changes to the LPDP concerning the regime
applicable to the processing of biometric data were introduced through Law 19.924 of 18
December 2020. In addition, Uruguay ratified Convention 108 through Law No. 19.030 on
the approval of the Council of Europe's Convention for the Protection of Individuals with

2452
     Commission Implementing Decision 2012/484/EU of 21 August 2012 pursuant to Directive 95/46/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the adequate protection of personal data by the Eastern Republic of
Uruguay with regard to automated processing of personal data, OJ L 227, 23.8.2012, p. 11–14.
2453
     Opinion 6/2010 on the level of protection of personal data in the Eastern Republic of Uruguay (WP 177) of
12      October       2010,     available    at:     https://ec.europa.eu/justice/article-29/documentation/opinion-
recommendation/files/2010/wp177_en.pdf.
2454
     Law 18.331 of 11/08/2008, available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes/18331-2008.
2455
     Available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/decretos/414-2009.
2456
        Law      18.996      of    07/11/2012,     Article     43,    available      at    the   following     link:
https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes/18996-2012. The amendment concerned sources that are available to
access by the public. The concept is defined in Article 4(I) LPDP as “those databases which may be consulted by
any person, not prevented by a restrictive rule or without any requirement other than, where appropriate, the
payment of a fee”. The reform from 2012 introduced a new Article 9bis to clarify which data sources or
documents can be considered as sources of public access in accordance with the LPDP, notably official gazettes,
telephone directories, media, etc.
2457
     Law 19.355 of 19/12/2015, Article 83, available t: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes/19355-2015. The
reform clarified the procedure for the data protection authority (Unidad Reguladora y de Control de Datos
Personales, URCDP) to request the competent judicial authority to close a database.
2458
     Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation).
2459
     Law 19.670 of 15/10/2018, Articles 37 to 40, available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes/19670-
2018.
2460
     Decree 64/2020, available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/decretos/64-2020.

                                                       315
Regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data and its Additional Protocol. More recently,
Uruguay has been the first country from the American continent to ratify also the modernised
Convention 108 (Convention 108+) 2461.

Like the GDPR, the LPDP has a broad scope of application, applying to both private operators
and public authorities 2462. The definitions of ‘personal data’, ‘controller’, ‘processor’, ‘data
subject’ and ‘processing’ 2463 (which are similar to those used in the GDPR) have not changed
since the adoption of the adequacy decision. However, the amendments to the LPDP that were
introduced in 2018 have further increased convergence with the GPDR by extending the
territorial scope of the LPDP, subject to conditions that are similar to those in Article 3
GDPR. The LPDP now applies also to the processing of personal data by controllers or
processors not established in Uruguay when they offer goods or services to data subjects in
Uruguay, and to processing activities aimed at the monitoring of their behaviour 2464. This
confirms the intention of the Uruguayan legislator to strengthen the effectiveness of
Uruguay’s data protection regime.

The main data protection principles and obligations that were already provided by the LPDP
at the time of the adoption of the adequacy decision have remained in place without
substantial changes. This is notably the case for the principles of lawfulness 2465, purpose
limitation2466, accuracy and data minimisation 2467 and proportionality 2468 and data
retention 2469 and data security 2470. At the same time, several principles and obligations have
been further strengthened, bringing Uruguay’s data protection framework closer to the
requirements of the GDPR.

With respect to the principle of data security, an obligation to report data breaches has been
introduced into the LPDP 2471. Similarly to what is required under the GDPR, a controller or
processor that becomes aware of a data breach affecting the protection of personal data must
inform as soon as possible the URCDP 2472, and also the affected individuals if they have
suffered a significant impact on their rights 2473. Controllers and processors are required to
adopt mitigating measures in the first 24 hours following the detection of a data breach. Once


2461
     Through the Law 19.948 of 16 April 2021.
2462
     Article 3 LPDP.
2463
     All definitions included in Article 4 LPDP.
2464
     Article 37 Law 19670, available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes/19670-2018/37.
2465
     Article 6 LPDP.
2466
     Article 8 LPDP.
2467
     Article 7 LPDP.
2468
     Article 7 LPDP.
2469
     Article 8 LPDP.
2470
     Article 10 LPDP.
2471
     Article 38 Law 19.670, available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes/19670-2018/38 and Article 4
Decree 64/2020, available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/decretos/64-2020/4.
2472 When a security breach is detected the data controller or the data processor, as the case may be, must start
the necessary procedures to minimize the impact of the incident within the first 24 hours (Article 3 Decree No.
64/2020). When learning about the occurrence of a data breach, data controllers must inform the URCDP within
72 hours, giving as much detail as possible about the event and the mitigating measures that have been taken. If
the breach significantly affects the rights of the data subjects, they must be informed in clear and simple
language (Article 4 Decree No. 64/020). Processors must directly address data controllers to inform them. Once
the breach has been remedied, the controller must draw up a detailed report on the security breach and the
measures taken to be sent to the URCDP.
2473
     Decree 64/2020, Article 4, available at: Decreto N° 64/020 (impo.com.uy)

                                                      316
the breach has been properly managed and its effects contained, the controller must prepare a
detailed report for the URCDP.

In terms of accountability, the LPDP now expressly provides that controllers and processors
are responsible for any violation of the data protection law. In exercising their responsibilities,
they must put in place adequate technical and procedural measures in order to ensure fair
processing and they must demonstrate the effective implementation of such measures 2474.
Moreover, the reform of 2018 modernised the accountability requirements that applied under
the previous regime by introducing obligations that are also part of the GDPR, in particular to
implement the principles of data protection by design 2475 and by default 2476, to appoint a data
protection officer in specific cases 2477, to carry out data protection impact assessments2478 and
to consult the URCDP prior to starting any processing activities which, according to the
assessment, would result in a high risk for the individual if no measures to mitigate the risks
are taken 2479.

In addition to the strengthening of data protection principles and obligations, the protections
for special categories of data (i.e., sensitive data) have been reinforced since the adoption of
the adequacy decision. The LPDP already offered additional protections for most of the
categories of personal data that are considered sensitive in the GDPR, i.e., for data about an
individual’s ethnic origin, religion, philosophy, political opinions or sexual life, as well as for
health data (including genetic data 2480) and data revealing membership in a political
organisation or trade union 2481. In the context of the amendment of the LPDP in 2020,
additional protections were introduced also for biometric data. First, a definition of biometric
data processed for the purpose of uniquely identifying a natural person has been added to the

2474
     Article 12 LPDP, as amended by Article 39 Law No 19.670.
2475
     Article 8 Decree 64/2020.
2476
     Article 9 Decree 64/2020.
2477
     Article 40 Law 19.670, available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes/19670-2018/38 and Articles 10 to
15 Decree 64/2020, available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/decretos/64-2020/. The obligation to appoint a
Data Protection Officer applies to public entities, private entities that are wholly or partly state-owned, as well as
to private entities that process sensitive data as their main business or that process large volumes of data. Data
protection officers are tasked among others with providing advice on the development and implementation of
data protection safeguards, as well as with monitoring compliance and proposing measures, where relevant. They
also act as a link with the Data Protection Authority.
2478
     The new rules also have also introduced the obligation to carry out, in specific cases and before the
processing starts, a data protection impact assessment. This is for instance the case when the processing of
sensitive data is the core business of the controller or when it concerns profiling activities. The processing of
personal data of minors or sensitive groups also carries with it the obligation of performing an impact
assessment, as does the processing of high volumes of data. Finally, international data transfers to third countries
or international organisations that do not ensure an appropriate level of protection are also subject to this
obligation. Controllers and processors must also inform the URCDP when the result of the assessment indicates
a significant risk for the protection of individual rights.
2479
     Article 7 Decree 64/2020, available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/decretos/64-2020/7. A data
protection impact assessment must be carried out inter alia when the processing of sensitive data is the core
business of the controller or when it concerns profiling activities, if personal data of minors or sensitive groups is
processed or if the processing concerns a large amount of personal data. Finally, the transfer of personal data to
third countries or international organisations that do not ensure an appropriate level of protection – as far as such
transfers are possible - is also subject to this obligation. Controllers and processors must inform the URCDP
when the result of the assessment indicates a significant risk for the protection of individual rights.
2480
      The definition of ‘health data’ provided bv Article 4(D) Decree 414/2009 states that data relating to the
genetic information of an individual is considered health data.
2481
     The definition of sensitive data is included in Article 4(E) LPDP. Similarly to what is provided in the GDPR,
Article 18 LPDP allows the processing of sensitive data only where the data subject has given explicit consent or
where processing is based on a law.

                                                        317
LPDP and that definition is very close to the one provided by the GDPR 2482. Second, the
LPDP now provides that biometric data can be processed only after an impact assessment has
been carried out 2483. Uruguay has also ratified Convention 108+ that requires to treat genetic
and biometric data uniquely identifying a person as special categories of data 2484. Finally, the
protection of sensitive data has been strengthened more generally by requiring an impact
assessment whenever the processing of special categories of data is the core business of the
controller 2485.

As regards individual rights, the rights that were already guaranteed by the LPDP at the time
of the adoption of the adequacy decision have remained in place without substantial changes,
including the right to obtain information about the processing 2486, the right of access 2487, the
right to rectification 2488 and the right to object decisions based on automated processing,
including profiling 2489. Concerning the right to erasure 2490, the URCDP has established
through various decisions a ‘right to be forgotten’ 2491 similar to the one recognised in the EU
(i.e., a right to the de-indexation of information available through search engines) by
extending the rights to deletion and objection and drawing on the principles of purpose
limitation and data accuracy set out in the LPDP. Moreover, the URCDP created an obligation
for controllers assessing this type of request to carry out a balancing between the right to data
protection and the rights to freedom of the press and freedom of expression. More recently,
the exercise of the ‘right to be forgotten’ was upheld in a decision of a civil court 2492 which
was based on the arguments used in decisions of the URCDP 2493. The URCDP has also issued
guidance and made available online tools to facilitate the exercise of individual rights 2494.




2482
     Article 4(Ñ) LPDP, added through Article 3 Law 19924 of 18/12/2020.
2483
     See Article 18-bis Law 18.331, introduced through Article 94 Law 19.924 of 18/12/2020, available at: Ley
N° 18331 (impo.com.uy) The impact assessment has to be carried out in accordance with the procedures set out
in Articles 6 and 7 of Decree 64/2020. Moreover, having ratified the Council of Europe’s modernised
Convention for the Protection of Individuals with Regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data and its
Additional Protocol (Convention 108+), Uruguay will be required under Article 6 of the Convention to treat
biometric data as a special category of data once the Convention has entered into force.
2484
     Article 6 Convention 108+.
2485
     Article 7 Decree 64/2020.
2486
     Article 13 LPDP.
2487
     Article 14 LPDP.
2488
     Article 15 LPDP, that also recognises the right to seek the update of personal data, the right to have personal
data included in a database.
2489
      Article 21 LPDP also recognises the right to object in the context of processing of personal data for
marketing purposes, including profiling.
2490
     Article 15 LPDP
2491
      Recent decisions and reports on the application of the right to be forgotten are the report 305/019 of 13
September 2019, available at: Informe Nº 305/019, de 13 de setiembre de 2019 | Unidad Reguladora y de
Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy) and 17/2016 of 14 September 2016, available at: Dictamen N°
17/016 | Unidad Reguladora y de Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy)). Other relevant decisions are
decisions 1040/2012 of 20 December 2012, available at: Resolución N° 1.040/012 | Unidad Reguladora y de
Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy)) and decisions 2/014, available at: Dictamen N° 2/014 | Unidad
Reguladora y de Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy) ) and 6/016 of 9 March 2016, available at:
Resolución N° 6/016 | Unidad Reguladora y de Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy).
2492
     Decision 60/2021 of the Civil Court number 2 of 19 October 2021.
2493
     Notably decision 17/2016 of 14 September 2016, available at: Dictamen N° 17/016 | Unidad Reguladora y de
Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy)).
2494
      Recent decisions and reports on the application of the right to be forgotten are the report 305/019 of 13
September 2019 and 17/2016. Other relevant decisions are decisions 1040/2012 and decisions 2/014 and 6/016/

                                                       318
According to the LPDP, transfers to third countries or international organisations that do not
provide an adequate level of protection according to international or regional data protection
standards are in principle prohibited 2495. The URCDP can determine which countries provide
such adequate level of protection. In practice, EU/EEA Member States as well as countries or
territories benefitting from an adequacy finding from the European Commission under
Directive 95/46/EC (Data Protection Directive) 2496 or the GDPR have been recognised by the
URCDP as countries providing an adequate level of protection 2497. A first list of countries that
were considered to provide an adequate level of protection was published in June 2009 2498,
using Uruguay's own rules and the Data Protection Directive as the standard for assessment.
In June 2019, a new instruction of the URCDP modified the assessment criteria, setting the
GDPR and the Ibero-American Standards approved in 2017 by the Ibero-American Data
Protection Network as the standard for an adequacy finding 2499.

Subject to authorisation from the URCDP, data transfers to non-adequate countries or
organisations can also take place if sufficient guarantees for the protection of private life and
the fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals, including the exercise of individual
rights, are provided 2500. These guarantees can be provided through contractual clauses or
codes of conduct within multinational companies or international organisations 2501. The
URCDP has recently issued an instruction setting out the “minimum content” of contractual
clauses which ensure the level of protection required by the LPDP 2502. These clauses must
provide details of the transfer and the processing activities, including their purpose,
definitions of relevant terms, rules on the use of processors and sub-processors, the obligation
to notify data breaches and to put in place accountability measures, a right to information and
to deletion, limited data retention and rules on onward transfers, dispute resolution clauses,
clauses ensuring the exercise of individual rights and clauses on the competence of the
supervisory authority, as well as rules regarding confidentiality and access to information by
government authorities 2503.

Finally, the transfer of personal data to third countries not considered adequate is allowed in
certain limited situations which are similar to the derogations recognised by the GDPR,
notably where the individual has given its unambiguous consent, where transfers are
necessary for the performance of contracts between the data subject and the controller,



2495
     Article 23 LPDP, first paragraph.
2496
     Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of
individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data.
2497
      See https://www.gub.uy/unidad-reguladora-control-datos-personales/institucional/normativa/resolucion-n-
63023 and, as regards companies participating in the EU-US Data Privacy Framework,
https://www.gub.uy/unidad-reguladora-control-datos-personales/institucional/normativa/resolucion-n-70023.
2498
                    Available              at:              https://www.gub.uy/unidad-reguladora-control-datos-
personales/institucional/normativa/resolucion-n-17009.
2499
                    Available              at:              https://www.gub.uy/unidad-reguladora-control-datos-
personales/institucional/normativa/resolucion-n-4019.
2500
     Article 23 LPDP, penultimate paragraph.
2501
     Article 35 RPDP.
2502
     https://www.gub.uy/unidad-reguladora-control-datos-personales/institucional/normativa/resolucion-n-41021.
2503
     In addition, the Ibero-American Data Protection Network, of which the URCDP is a member, has recently
approved the “Standard Contractual Clauses for Latin American Countries” which aim at offering common
contractual clauses for Latin America convergent with the modernised EU Standard Contractual Clauses.

                                                     319
including for pre-contractual relationships, in case of important public interests and for the
vital interests of the individual 2504.

Importantly, prior to any transfer of data to a non-adequate country or international
organisation, a data protection impact assessment must be carried out 2505. In those cases in
which the impact assessment concludes that there are high risks for the protection of personal
data, the data controller is required to inform the URCDP 2506, which can in turn exercise its
role of monitoring compliance with the LPDP, including through inspections 2507.

       1.2. Oversight, enforcement and redress

The independent entity in charge of overseeing compliance with the data protection rules in
Uruguay is the URCDP. The Agency can act either on its own initiative or on the basis of
complaints from data subjects 2508. It carries out a number of tasks, such as promoting public
awareness in relation to data protection, giving its opinion on administrative and legislative
measures relating to data protection, promoting the awareness of controllers and processors of
their obligations, monitoring and informing about relevant developments regarding data
protection in Uruguay and abroad, and publishing annual reports on its activities. In carrying
out its supervisory duties, the Agency has access to all relevant information, as well as to the
premises where processing operations are carried out or administered and where data or
technical equipment are stored or used 2509.

Under the LPDP, compliance with data protection requirements is ensured through a
combination of different measures. The LPDP provides the URCDP with a broad range of
powers that are similar to those foreseen in the GDPR, in particular to issue warnings,
reprimands and orders (inter alia to suspend processing or engaging in Court proceedings to
request the closure of a database 2510, bring processing into compliance with the Act,
implement security measures and rectify, erase or restrict processing), and to make its
decisions public 2511. The URCDP can issue fines that can amount up to 500 000 Indexed
Units 2512.

As regards the rules to establish the amounts of the fines, the URCDP issued an instruction in
2015 which groups the possible infringements of the LPDP under four categories (very minor,
minor, serious and very serious infringements) and sets a range for the amount of the

2504
     Article 23 LPDP.
2505
     Article 6(f) Decree 64/2020.
2506
     Article 7 Decree 64/2020, available at: Decreto N° 64/020 (impo.com.uy). Also relevant the guidance on
how to carry out an impact assessment, available at: Guía de Evaluación de Impacto en la Protección de Datos |
Unidad Reguladora y de Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy).
2507
     Article 34 (D) LPDP gives the URCDP the power to monitor compliance with the legal regime, in particular
with the rules on legality, completeness, accuracy, proportionality and security of the processing activities, and
in order to do so the URCDP may carry out the relevant checks and inspection actions.
2508
     Article 34 LPDP and Chapter V Decree 414/2009.
2509
     Article 34(d)(4) LPDP.
2510
     Following the amendment of Article 35(5) LPDP through Law 19.355 of 19/12/2015, Article 83, available
at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes/19355-2015.
2511
     Article 25 Decree 414/2009.
2512
     An Indexed Unit is a unit of value that is readjusted according to inflation as measured by the Consumer
Price Index. This unit varies daily so that at the end of the month it accumulates a variation with respect to the
value of the UI of the previous month. In June 2022, the value of one indexed unit equalled to around 5.5
Uruguayan pesos.

                                                      320
administrative fines for each category 2513. The instruction also sets out the factors to be taken
into account when deciding on whether to impose a fine and on its amount 2514. Those factors
are similar to the factors listed in the GDPR and include the gravity and reiteration of the
infringement, previous records of the controller as well as the categories of personal data
affected, the volume of the processing, the existence of security measures, the affected
individual rights, the damage caused to the affected data subjects, the benefits derived from
the infringing processing activities and any other circumstances relevant to assess the
infringement.

As regards possibilities for individuals to obtain redress, the Uruguayan system continues to
offer various avenues, including the possibility to lodge a complaint with the Data Protection
Agency 2515, obtain judicial redress directly against controllers and processors (both private
operators and public authorities) through the habeas data action 2516 and to obtain
compensation for damages..

The URCDP plays an active role in Uruguay and Latin America when it comes to exercising
its oversight role, engaging with stakeholders and cooperating with other authorities at
regional and international level.

As part of its supervisory powers, the URCDP carries out supervision and enforcement
activities, including inspections, and handles notifications, written questions and complaints.
For example, in 2021 the URCDP issued three administrative fines. In 2020, 14 decisions
with observations to data controllers, 24 decisions including warnings and eight
administrative fines, as well as 20 calls on data controllers to adapt processing activities to the
requirements of the LPDP 2517. In 2019 2518, four administrative fines were imposed 2519. In
2018 2520 the URDCP issued three decisions with observations to data controllers, seven
decisions including warnings and three administrative fines.

The URCDP is also active in terms of awareness-raising and providing guidance. Its website
includes resources for data controllers, data processors and individuals, including the
possibility to lodge complaints online2521 and to seek advice 2522 using online tools. A new

2513
     From 100 to 12000 indexed units in the case of minor infringements, from 12 001 to 90 000 indexed units in
the case of serious infringements, and from 90 001 to 500 000 indexed units in the case of very serious
infringements. Very minor infringements are subject to warnings by the URCDP.
2514
                   Available              at:              https://www.gub.uy/unidad-reguladora-control-datos-
personales/institucional/normativa/resolucion-1052015.
2515
     Article 34(a) LPDP.
2516
     Chapter VIII LPDP.
2517
     Annual report 2020, available at: Memoria anual 2020 | Unidad Reguladora y de Control de Datos
Personales (www.gub.uy).
2518
     All the relevant resolutions issued by the URCDP in 2019 are available at: Resoluciones | Unidad
Reguladora y de Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy).
2519
     Decision 22/019, available at: Resolución Nº 22/019, de 14 de mayo de 2019 | Unidad Reguladora y de
Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy)), Decision 25/019, available at: Resolución Nº 25/019, de 28 de
mayo de 2019 | Unidad Reguladora y de Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy)), Decision 43/019, available
at: Resolución Nº 43/019, de 24 de setiembre de 2019 | Unidad Reguladora y de Control de Datos Personales
(www.gub.uy) ) and Decision 48/2019, available at: Resolución N° 48/019, de 22 de noviembre de 2019 |
Unidad Reguladora y de Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy).
2520
     All the relevant resolutions issued by the URCDP in 2018 are available at: Resoluciones | Unidad
Reguladora y de Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy).
2521
     Available at: Denuncias ante la unidad reguladora y de control de datos personales - URCDP. | Trámites
(www.gub.uy).

                                                     321
functionality allowing online data breach notification 2523 has been recently added. In the
context of the Covid-19 pandemic, the URCDP advised the Government and the public on
issues relating to data protection (e.g., as regards the processing of personal data in a situation
of national emergency, the processing of sensitive data as part the vaccination strategy or the
processing of personal data in the telework context) 2524.

The URCDP has also provided extensive guidance through the publication of user guides.
Among the most recent are the general guide on data protection in Uruguay 2525, the guidance
on processing by foreign controllers subject to the LPDP 2526, the guidance on management
and notification of personal data breaches 2527, the guidance on how to carry out a data
protection impact assessment 2528, the guidance on data protection officers 2529, the guidance on
data processing activities carried out by telecommunications operators 2530, the guidance on
data processing in the education sector 2531 and the guidance for data processing activities in
the public administration 2532. The URCDP also carries out training activities addressed to
public authorities, controllers and the general public. Recent examples are the workshops for
data protection officers 2533 or activities with schools 2534 and public administrations.

In terms of international engagement, the URCDP held the Presidency of the Ibero American
Data Protection Network 2535 from 2016 to 2020 and is also part of the Bureau of the
Consultative Committee for the protection of individuals with regard to the automatic
processing of personal data (Convention 108) 2536.

2. ACCESS TO AND USE OF PERSONAL DATA TRANSFERRED FROM THE
   EUROPEAN UNION BY PUBLIC AUTHORITIES IN URUGUAY

2522
     Available at: Consultas a la Unidad Reguladora y de Control de Datos Personales - URCDP | Trámites
(www.gub.uy).
2523
     Available at: Sistema de gestión de la URCDP | Unidad Reguladora y de Control de Datos Personales
(www.gub.uy).
2524
     Annual reports covering years 2012 to 2018 available at: https://www.gub.uy/unidad-reguladora-control-
datos-personales/institucional/informacion-gestion/memorias-anuales .
2525
     Available at: Guía general de Protección de Datos Personales en Uruguay | Unidad Reguladora y de Control
de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy).
2526
     Available at: Guía para el cumplimiento de obligaciones por entidades extranjeras | Unidad Reguladora y de
Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy).
2527
     Available at: Guía para la gestión, documentación y comunicación de vulneraciones de seguridad en datos
personales | Unidad Reguladora y de Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy).
2528
     Available at: Guía de Evaluación de Impacto en la Protección de Datos | Unidad Reguladora y de Control de
Datos Personales (www.gub.uy).
2529
     Available at: Delegado de Protección de Datos Personales Documento de Trabajo | Unidad Reguladora y de
Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy).
2530
     Available at: Manejo de datos personales en operadores de telecomunicaciones | Unidad Reguladora y de
Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy).
2531
     Available at: Guía Educación y datos personales | Unidad Reguladora y de Control de Datos Personales
(www.gub.uy).
2532
     Available at: Manejo de datos personales en la Administración Pública | Unidad Reguladora y de Control de
Datos Personales (www.gub.uy).
2533
     See for instance information on the URCDP’s website, available at: Curso para delegados de Protección de
Datos Personales | Unidad Reguladora y de Control de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy).
2534
     Information on “your data have value” campaigns available at: Campañas | Unidad Reguladora y de Control
de Datos Personales (www.gub.uy).
2535
     Information available at: Seminario "Europa-Iberoamérica: una visión común de la Protección de Datos. El
nuevo Marco Europeo y su incidencia en Iberoamérica" | Red Iberoamericana de Protección de datos
(redipd.org).
2536
     See information on the website of the Council of Europe, available at: Consultative Committee (coe.int).

                                                     322
       2.1 General legal framework

When collecting and (further) processing personal data for criminal law enforcement purposes
in Uruguay, public authorities are subject to precise and accessible rules governing the scope
and application of a measure and imposing minimum safeguards. These limitations and
safeguards follow from the overarching constitutional framework and specific laws that
regulate the activities of public authorities in the areas of criminal law enforcement and
national security.

First, several provisions of the Constitution of Uruguay guarantee the right to privacy. In
particular, Article 28 of the Constitution provides that “the papers of private individuals, their
correspondence, whether epistolary, telegraphic, or of any other nature, are inviolable, and
they may never be searched, examined, or intercepted except in conformity with laws which
may be enacted for reasons of public interest”; while Article 11 of the Constitution states that
“the sanctity of the home is inviolable” and that “no one may enter it by night without the
consent of its master, and by day only at the express order of a competent judge, in writing,
and in cases determined by law”. Moreover, Article 10 of the Constitution stipulates that
“private actions of persons which do not in any way affect the public order or prejudice others
shall be outside the jurisdiction of the magistrates”. It should also be noted that although the
Constitution does not expressly recognise the right to the protection of personal data, its
Article 72 states that “the enumeration of rights, duties, and guarantees made in this
Constitution does not exclude others which are inherent in human beings or which are derived
from a republican form of government”. Both case law 2537 and legal doctrine interpret rights
as being “inherent in human beings” when they are part of international human rights treaties
to which Uruguay is a party, such as Convention 108 2538. Importantly, Article 1 of the LPDP
expressly stipulates that “the right to the protection of personal data is inherent in human
beings and it is therefore included in Article 72 of the Constitution of the Republic”.

All laws must conform to the Constitution of Uruguay 2539. As described in more detail in
sections 2.2.1 and 2.3.1, the general principles following from the Constitution of Uruguay
are reflected in the specific laws that regulate the powers of law enforcement and national
security authorities.

Second, the right to privacy and important aspects of the right to the protection of personal
data are also guaranteed through Uruguay’s adherence to international conventions.

This includes Uruguay’s adherence to the American Convention on Human Rights and its
submission to the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights 2540.

Pursuant to Article 11 of the Convention, everyone has the right to the protection of the law
against arbitrary or abusive interference with his private life, his family, his home, or his
correspondence. In accordance with Article 30 of the Convention, a public authority may only
interfere with the right to privacy in accordance with laws enacted for reasons of general
2537
     See e.g., ruling of Supreme Court 44/021 of 9 March 2021.
2538
     See e.g., C.H. Mendes, R. Gargarella & S. Guid, The Oxford Handbook of Constitutional Law in Latin
America, Oxford: Oxford University Press 2022, p. 272.
2539
     See Article 256 of the Constitution of Uruguay.
2540
           See         the     list      of      signatures    and  ratifications,     available    at:
https://www.cidh.oas.org/basicos/english/Basic4.Amer.Conv.Ratif.htm

                                                 323
interest and in accordance with the purpose for which such restrictions have been established.
These protections apply to all persons falling under the jurisdiction of the state parties to the
Convention, irrespective of their nationality 2541.

The Inter-American Court of Human Rights has notably ruled that the protections offered by
the right to privacy extend to telephone conversations 2542. In addition, the Court has specified
that, to determine if an interference with the right to privacy is arbitrary or abusive, three
factors must be considered: (1) it must be established by law (2) it must have a legitimate
purpose, and (3) it must be appropriate, necessary and proportionate 2543. Regarding the first
factor, the Court has clarified that the law on which the interference is based must be clear
and precise with detailed rules to establish the boundaries of the restriction. This includes the
specific circumstances in which the restriction applies, who can request, order and carry out
the restriction, and procedurally how to implement it 2544.

Moreover, in 2013, Uruguay ratified Convention 108 2545. On 5 August 2021 Uruguay also
ratified the amending Protocol creating the modernised Convention 108 (Convention
108+) 2546. Article 9 of Convention 108 provides that derogations from the general data
protection principles (Article 5 Quality of data), the rules governing special categories of data
(Article 6 Special categories of data) and data subject rights (Article 8 Additional safeguards
to the data subject) are only permissible when such derogation is provided for by the law of
the Party and constitutes a necessary measure in a democratic society in the interests of
protecting State security, public safety, the monetary interests of the State or the suppression
of criminal offences, or for protecting the data subject or the rights and freedoms of others.
The guarantees set out in Convention 108 are extended to every individual regardless of
nationality or residence 2547.

Therefore, through adherence to the American Convention of Human Rights and Convention
108, as well as its submission to the jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights, Uruguay is subject to a number of obligations, enshrined in international law, that
frame its system of government access on the basis of principles, safeguards and individual
rights similar to those guaranteed under EU law and applicable to the Member States.
2541
     Article 1 of the Convention: “The States Parties to this Convention undertake to respect the rights and
freedoms recognised herein and to ensure to all persons subject to their jurisdiction the free and full exercise of
those rights and freedoms, without any discrimination for reasons of race, color, sex, language, religion, political
or other opinion, national or social origin, economic status, birth, or any other social condition”.
2542
     Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Escher et al. v. Brazil, Series C 200, judgment of 20 November
2009, paragraph 114. This is the case irrespective of the content of these conversations and can even include
both the technical operations designed to record this content by taping it and listening to it, or any other element
of the communication process (e.g., the destination or origin of the calls that are made, the identity of the
speakers, the frequency, time and duration of the calls). See also Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Tristán
Donoso v. Panama, Series C 193, judgment of 27 January 2009, paragraph 75-76.
2543
     Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Escher et al. v. Brazil, Series C 200, judgment of 20 November
2009, paragraph 129. See also Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Tristán Donoso v. Panama, Series C 193,
judgment of 27 January 2009, paragraph 76.
2544
     Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Escher et al. v. Brazil, Series C 200, judgement of 20 November
2009, paragraph 130-131.
2545
     See the Chart of signatures and ratifications, available at: https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-
list?module=signatures-by-treaty&treatynum=108.
2546
     See the Chart of signatures and ratifications, available at: https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-
list?module=signatures-by-treaty&treatynum=223. Convention 108+ has yet to enter into force.
2547
     See Article 1 of Convention 108, as explained in the Explanatory Report to the Convention, available at:
https://rm.coe.int/16800ca434.

                                                       324
Third, the LPDP’s general rights and principles apply to the processing of personal data by
public authorities for law enforcement and national security purposes 2548, notably the rights to
information 2549, access 2550, rectification 2551 and erasure 2552, and the principles of
lawfulness 2553, purpose limitation 2554, accuracy and data minimisation2555, proportionality2556,
data retention 2557 and data security 2558. In addition, specific safeguards are set out for
processing in the law enforcement and national security area. Article 25 LPDP specifically
limits the processing of personal data by law enforcement and national security authorities to
what is “necessary for the strict compliance with the duties legally assigned to such bodies for
national defence, public security or the suppression of crime” 2559. It also stipulates that law
enforcement authorities shall delete personal data that is no longer necessary for the purposes
that led to their storage. Moreover, Article 26 LPDP specifically confirms that data subjects
may exercise their rights of access, rectification and erasure against law enforcement or
national security authorities, including with respect to data that is being processed for public
safety, defence, national security and law enforcement purposes. Controllers are allowed to
deny, in whole or in part, requests to exercise these rights, but only to the extent necessary for
specific purposes listed exhaustively in the law and similar to the purposes that allow for a
restriction of data subject rights in the EU data protection framework 2560.

These abovementioned principles and safeguards can be invoked by individuals before
independent administrative bodies and courts to obtain redress, in particular through the
habeas data action (see sections 2.2.2, 2.2.3, 2.3.2 and 2.3.3).

       2.2 Access and use by Uruguayan public authorities for criminal law enforcement
           purposes

In Uruguay, criminal law enforcement functions are carried out by the National Police, the
National Naval Prefecture and the National Air Police. In the specific case of financial crime,
the responsible authority is the Financial Information and Analysis Unit (UIAF) 2561.

2548
     While Article 3 LPDP sets out that the law does not apply to “databases whose purpose is public security,
defence, State security and its activities in criminal matters, investigation and suppression of crime”, the
Uruguayan authorities have explicitly confirmed that in line with the obligations of the Constitution of Uruguay
and Uruguay’s international commitments in the area of human rights, the exemptions in Article 3 LPDP are to
be understood to apply only to the obligation to register databases, but not to the main principles set out in the
law. In addition, Article 25 LPDP sets out that the provisions of the Law, including the ones concerning the
registration of databases, do apply to personal data which have been stored for administrative purposes in the
databases of the armed forces, police or intelligence agencies. This includes personal data in files concerning
criminal records.
2549
     Article 13 LPDP.
2550
     Article 14 LPDP.
2551
     Article 15 LPDP, that also recognises the right to seek the update of personal data, the right to have personal
data included in a database.
2552
     Article 15 LPDP
2553
     Article 6 LPDP.
2554
     Article 8 LPDP.
2555
     Article 7 LPDP.
2556
     Article 7 LPDP.
2557
     Article 8 LPDP.
2558
     Article 10 LPDP.
2559
     Article 25 LPDP.
2560
     Article 26 LPDP. Such purposes include the defence of the State or public safety, the protection of the rights
and freedoms of third parties or the needs of investigations that are being carried out.
2561
         Article    2    of     Law     No.      19.574      of     20     December      2017,       available   at:
https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes/19574-2017.

                                                       325
Uruguayan law imposes a number of limitations on the access to and use of personal data for
criminal law enforcement purposes and provides oversight and redress mechanisms. The
conditions under which access to personal data can take place and the safeguards applicable to
the use of these powers are described in the following sections.

         2.2.1    Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

Personal data transferred from the EU on the basis of the adequacy decision and subsequently
processed by Uruguayan controllers/processors may be obtained by Uruguayan law
enforcement authorities by means of investigative measures under statutes providing for law
enforcement access, the main one being the Criminal Procedure Code 2017 (CPC 2017)2562,
or on the basis of anti-money laundering and anti-terrorist financing legislation.

The CPC 2017 provides Uruguayan law enforcement authorities with a legal basis to access
personal data held by controllers/processors through searches and seizures, the use of
production orders or the interception of communications. It lays down clear and precise rules
on the scope and application of these measures, thereby ensuring that the interference with the
rights of individuals will be limited to what is necessary for a specific criminal investigation
and proportionate to the purpose pursued. Moreover, as explained in more detail below, prior
judicial authorisation is in principle required to exercise these powers.

More specifically, searches and seizures may only be carried out if there are reasonable
grounds to believe that objects (including hard drives or other electronic devices where
personal data is kept or stored) from criminal activity or objects relevant to the investigation
may be found in a home or other enclosed place 2563. In terms of procedural safeguards, a
search or seizure may only take place on the basis of a court-issued warrant 2564. Warrantless
searches or seizures are allowed only in a limited number of exceptional circumstances set out
in the CPC 20172565. The inhabitant of the premise subject to the search is always notified of
the search and in principle present when it is carried out. Where this is not the case, this must
be recorded in the minutes of the search 2566.


2562
     Law No. 19.293 of 19 December 2014, available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/codigo-proceso-penal-
2017/19293-2014.
2563
     Article 191, 195 and 197 CPC 2017.
2564
     Article 191 and 195(1) CPC 2017. The search warrant must contain detailed information, including the name
of the authorising prosecutor, the date on which the search is to be carried out, the specific purpose of the search
and the precise designation of the property to be searched and seized, see Article 192(1) and 198 CPC 2017.
2565
     First, based on Article 189(2) CPC 2017, a law enforcement authority, by order of the prosecutor or on its
own, giving immediate notice to the prosecutor, may inspect or order the search of open places, objects or
persons, when there are sufficient grounds to consider that traces of a crime may be found or that the accused or
a fugitive is in a certain place. Second, Article 195(5) CPC 2017 provides that a police report of domestic
violence counts as express authorisation for the search of a home within forty-eight hours of its presentation.
Third, Article 195(3) CPC 2017 provides that a search may be carried out at night, with the express consent of
the head of the household, with the immediate notification of the public prosecutor and the competent judge.
Fourth, Article 197(2) CPC 2017 provides that property which constitutes the corpus delicti or which is
necessary for the clarification of the facts under investigation may be seized without a court order in the case of a
crime committed ‘in flagrante delicto’ or in imminent danger of its perpetration. When there is danger due to
delay, the public prosecutor must order the seizure, reporting to the competent judge and in accordance with his
decision.
2566
     Article 196(1) CPC 2017. In case of a search of a premise other than a home, the prior notice of the person
who is in charge of the premise may, at the discretion of the court, be dispensed with when the prior notification
is considered detrimental to the effectiveness of the search, see Article 192(2) CPC 2017.

                                                        326
Illegal searches are subject to criminal sanctions. Article 287 of the Criminal Code provides
that a public official who, by abusing his functions or without the formalities prescribed by
law, orders or carries out a personal inspection or search, shall be punished with three to
twelve months imprisonment 2567. Furthermore, Article 294 provides that anyone who enters
another person’s home or its premises against the express or tacit will of the owner or the
person acting in his stead, or who enters it clandestinely or by deception, shall be punished
with three to twenty-four months imprisonment. When committed by a public official,
without the conditions and formalities prescribed by law, this counts as an aggravating
circumstance 2568.

Under the CPC 2017, the public prosecutor may also order the production of public or private
documents that are relevant to an investigation 2569. Whoever is in possession of the requested
documents is obliged to immediately produce them or hand them over to the public
prosecutor, unless he invokes a legitimate reason 2570 for not doing so, in which case it will be
for the court to take a decision 2571. Furthermore, the Public Prosecutor’s Office may request
from public or private institutions all necessary information that is available in their records
for the investigation to be carried out, provided that the disclosure of such information does
not imply interferences with the fundamental rights and guarantees applicable to individuals,
including the right to privacy 2572. Communications between the accused and his defence
counsel or persons covered by professional secrecy may not be admitted as evidence or used
in any other way 2573.

Specific limitations and safeguards apply to the interception of communications 2574. This
power may only be used in the context of a criminal investigation and on the basis of a
judicial warrant 2575. An interception of communications may be authorised “when there is
sufficient evidence to consider that a punishable offence has been or may be committed”2576.
Importantly, the Court of Appeals in Criminal Matters No. 2 has ruled that the judge, when
assessing the application for an interception warrant, must always review the proportionality
of the measure in light of the circumstances of the case and assess whether there are no other
effective, less intrusive means of collecting evidence available 2577. This standard is also
enshrined in Article 208(1) CPC 2017, which provides that the judge’s decision (which must
be well-founded) must “expressly consider the necessity and proportionality of the measure
with respect to the restriction of the exercise of the limited right, under penalty of nullity”. In
addition, based on settled case-law of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, any

2567
     The Criminal Code is available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/codigo-penal/9155-1933.
2568
     Article 295 of the Criminal Code.
2569
     Article 203(1) CPC 2017.
2570
     For example, documents containing anonymous statements may not be brought to trial or used in any way,
unless they constitute the corpus delicti or come from the accused, see Article 173(3) CPC 2017.
2571
     Article 203(2) CPC 2017.
2572
     Article 45(k) CPC 2017.
2573
     Article 173(4) CPC 2017. This exception does not apply if these persons are also defendants, nor when they
are means for the preparation, execution or concealment of the offence.
2574
     Article 208 CPC 2017. Communications include telephone, radio or other forms of communication.
2575
     The CPC 2017 does not provide for any exceptions to this requirement.
2576
     Article 208(1) CPC 2017. The court may not intercept communications between the accused and his defence
counsel, unless the court orders it on the grounds that the lawyer may be criminally responsible for the acts under
investigation. This must be recorded in the respective decision. See Article 208(3) CPC 2017.
2577
     Court of Appeals in Criminal Matters No. 2, Sentence 377/2013, judgement of 6 November 2013, available
only at: http://bjn.poderjudicial.gub.uy/BJNPUBLICA/hojaInsumo2.seam?cid=84582.

                                                       327
interference with the inviolability of communications must be provided for by law, pursue a
legitimate aim and comply with the requirements of suitability, necessity and
proportionality 2578.

Procedurally, interception requests must be submitted by the prosecutor to the competent
judge 2579. An interception warrant is only valid for a – non-renewable – maximum period of
six months 2580. The interception must be stopped if the reasons used to authorise the measure
no longer exist, or once the interception warrant has expired 2581.

Specific rules govern investigative activities with respect to the prevention of money
laundering and the financing of terrorism. In this respect, Article 62 of Law No 19.574 allows
the use of electronic surveillance as part of a criminal investigation into any of the serious
crimes listed in Articles 30 to 33 of the Law (money laundering offences) and in Article 34 of
the Law (so-called “predicate offences” that precede the crime of money laundering, such as
drug trafficking and related crimes) 2582. As is the case with regard to the interception of
communications under the CPC 2017, electronic surveillance measures that interfere with the
inviolability of communications are only allowed insofar these measures are suitable,
necessary and proportionate. This follows from the previously mentioned case-law of the
Court of Appeals in Criminal Matters No. 2 and the Inter-American Court of Human
Rights 2583.

Procedurally, Article 62 of the Law prescribes that requests for electronic surveillance must
be submitted by the public prosecutor’s office to the competent court and must be reasoned.
The competent court is responsible for the supervision of the process. The results of the
surveillance activities must be transcribed in certified records so that they can be incorporated
into the proceedings. Once the defence council of the defendant has been appointed, the
proceedings must be made available to it for its control and analysis, and the material must be
submitted to the defendant for the recognition of voices and images.

Illegal wiretapping and related conduct are subject to criminal sanctions. Those who open,
intercept, destroy or hide correspondence, parcels, and other postal objects with the intention
of taking possession of their content or of disrupting their normal course may be punished




2578
     Inter-American Court of Human Rights, Escher and Others v. Brazil, Series C 200, judgment of 6 July 2009,
paragraph 116, and its citation of the case of Tristan Donoso vs Panama, Series C 193, judgment of 27 January
2009, paragraph 56.
2579
      Article 208(1) CPC 2017. The judicial decision ordering the interception must contain the name of the
person affected by the measure and, if possible, the telephone line or other means of communication to be
intercepted, recorded or registered. It must also indicate the form, scope and duration of the measure, as well as
the authority or official who will be in charge of the procedure. See Article 208(4) CPC 2017.
2580
     Article 208(4) CPC 2017.
2581
     Article 208(5) CPC 2017.
2582
      The object of electronic surveillance can take different forms, including telephone conversations, text
messages, e-mails, video cameras, microphones and communication data (metadata). See J.L.G. González,
‘Control y prevención de lavado de activos y financiamiento del terrorismo. Ley N° 18.494’, Revista de la
Facultad de Derecho 2010, p. 148, available at: http://www.redalyc.org/articulo.oa?id=568160365010.
2583
     Communications between the defendant and his defence counsel, in the exercise of the right of defence and
those communications that concern issues that are not related to the object of the investigation may not be
subjected to electronic surveillance in accordance with Article 62.

                                                      328
with one year of imprisonment or up to four years of penitentiary. When the offender is a
public official, this is considered an aggravating circumstance 2584.

Finally, Article 12 and 13 of Law No. 19.574 impose an obligation on persons and
undertakings subject to the law, such as financial institutions 2585, to report to the UIAF, on
their own initiative, any suspicious transaction, carried out or not, and any financial
transaction involving assets suspected of being illegitimate 2586. Prior to notifying the UIAF,
persons and undertakings subject to the law are required to identify their clients and take
certain customer due diligence measures, including identifying the beneficial owner of the
account or transaction (taking reasonable measures to verify its identity), gathering
information on the purpose of the commercial relationship and the nature of the business to be
conducted and monitoring the business relationship 2587. They are furthermore required to keep
records of all transactions carried out with or for their customers, both national and
international, including all the information obtained during the due diligence process, for a
minimum period of five years after the end of the business relationship or after the conclusion
of the occasional transaction or for a longer period of up to ten years, in accordance with the
provisions of the regulations. This information must be sufficient to allow for the
reconstruction of transactions and to constitute elements of evidence in court, if necessary,
and be available to the supervisory authorities and the competent criminal court upon
request 2588.

         2.2.2    Further use of the information collected

The further use of data collected by Uruguayan criminal law enforcement authorities on one
of the grounds referred to in Section 2.2.1, as well as the sharing of such data with a different
authority for purposes other than the ones for which it was originally collected (so-called
‘onward sharing’), is subject to safeguards and limitations.

First, the LPDP contains specific protections for personal data that is processed by public
authorities for law enforcement purposes, as explained in section 2.1. With respect to onward
sharing, it follows from Article 25 LPDP that the dissemination of personal data by these
authorities is limited to what is strictly necessary for the fulfilment of their respective tasks. In
addition, Article 25 LPDP provides that personal data that is collected for law enforcement


2584
     Article 296 of the Criminal Code.
2585
     Persons and undertakings subject to the law are all natural and legal persons subject to the control of the
Central Bank of Uruguay (Article 12 of Law No. 19.574) and the non-financial entities listed in Article 13 of
Law No. 19.574 (e.g., casinos, real estate agents and civil law notaries).
2586
     Pursuant to Article 12 of Law No. 19.574, a suspicious transaction is defined as a transaction “that in the use
and customs of the respective activity are unusual, are made without clear economic or legal justification or are
presented with unusual or unjustified complexity”. Pursuant to Decree No. 379/018 (Regulation of Law 19.574
against money laundering), reports of unusual or suspicious transactions must include at least the following
information: (1) identification of the natural or legal persons involved, (2) a description of the transactions that
are presumed to be unusual or suspicious, indicating whether or not they were carried out, their dates, amounts,
type of operation and, in general, any other data or information considered relevant for these purposes, (3) details
of the circumstances or indications that led the person making the communication to classify such transactions as
unusual or suspicious of being related to the laundering of proceeds of crime or the financing of terrorist
activities, attaching, where appropriate, a copy of the proceedings related to the analysis carried out. Decree No.
379/018 is available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/decretos/379-2018.
2587
     Article 15 of Law No. 19.574.
2588
     Article 21 of Law No. 19.574.

                                                       329
purposes must be deleted when they are no longer necessary for the purposes for which they
were stored.

Second, the different laws that allow for data collection by criminal law enforcement
authorities in Uruguay impose specific limitations and safeguards as to the use and further
dissemination of the information obtained in exercising the powers they grant.

As regards the powers of search and seizure, the CPC 2017 provides that the assets subject to
seizure shall be registered and duly individualised, and a record shall be kept of the person
who assumes the depositary 2589. The public prosecutor or the administrative authority, with
the authorisation of the court, may return the seized objects to the victim or to third
parties 2590.

With respect to the interception of communications, the CPC 2017 stipulates that intercepted,
recorded or registered material which is not incorporated into the investigation shall be
destroyed, unless a court order to the contrary is made for good reason to keep it on file for
the maximum duration of the investigation 2591. In a similar vein, Article 62 of Law No.
19.574 provides that the court must discard material obtained through electronic surveillance
that does not relate to the subject matter of the investigation. On the other hand, the court is
required to preserve and safeguard the electronic media containing the obtained material until
the sentence has been served.

In terms of investigative measures carried out in the context of the fight against money
laundering and terrorism financing, Law No. 19.574 provides that the UIAF may disclose
information relating to unusual or suspicious transactions to public authorities specialised in
combating money laundering and its predicate offences, when it considers the participation of
such authorities essential to complete ongoing investigations, for the purpose of obtaining the
elements of judgment necessary to link the transactions under investigation with the
aforementioned offences and to enable the competent criminal court to be informed 2592.

Finally, rules on mutual legal assistance in criminal matters are provided for by Law No.
19.574. These rules only apply to requests for legal assistance from foreign authorities for the
investigation or prosecution of the money laundering offences referred to in Articles 30 to 33
of the law and the predicate offences referred to in Article 34 of the law. Article 72 of the law
provides that in cases of requests for legal assistance in criminal matters concerning searches,
lifting of the bank secrecy, seizure, confiscation and delivery of any object, including, inter
alia, documents, records or effects, the acting national court shall process the request if it
determines that the request contains all the information justifying the measure requested. Such
measure shall be subject to the procedural and substantive Uruguayan law.

        2.2.3    Oversight

Different bodies provide oversight over the processing of personal data for criminal law
enforcement purposes by the relevant authorities of Uruguay.


2589
     Article 199(2) CPC 2017.
2590
     Article 200(1) CPC 2017.
2591
     Article 208(5) CPC 2017.
2592
     Article 28 of Law No. 19.574.

                                              330
First, the URCDP is competent to oversee compliance with the LPDP’s rights and principles
in the context of processing activities carried out by criminal law enforcement authorities.
Furthermore, the URCDP oversees compliance with the specific safeguards set out in Article
25 LPDP (see section 2.1 above). If the URCDP finds an infringement of the LPDP, it
provides the relevant public authority with a reasoned decision, stating that the facts
investigated constitute an infraction, who is responsible for that infraction, and the sanction to
be applied 2593. For example, in 2019 the URCDP delivered a number of opinions and reports
addressed to the National Secretariat for the Fight against Money Laundering and Terrorist
Financing 2594. One opinion dealt with the question whether it was lawful for the Secretariat to
publish the resolutions that impose sanctions to reporting entities 2595.

Second, the National Institution for Human Rights and the Ombudsman (INDDHH) adds
another layer of independent oversight. The INDDHH is a specialized institution of the
legislative branch, tasked to defend, promote and protect fundamental rights recognised by the
Constitution and international law 2596. It is headed by the Board of Directors, a collegiate
body whose five members are elected by the Uruguayan Parliament 2597. The INDDHH is
competent to investigate alleged human rights violations at the request of a party or of its own
initiative, and to report on the human rights situation at national, departmental or local
level 2598. The independence of the INDDHH is guaranteed by law 2599 and in carrying out its
investigations the INDDHH has access to all relevant information and can access all relevant
premises 2600.


2593
     Article 29 and 31 RPDP. Sanctions can consist of warnings, reprimands and orders (inter alia to suspend
processing or engaging in Court proceedings to request the closure of a database, bring processing into
compliance with the Act, implement security measures and rectify, erase or restrict processing), and to make the
decision public, see Article 35 LPDP and 25 RPDP.
2594
       See the URCDP publication ‘Resoluciones, dictámenes e informes 2019’, available at:
https://www.gub.uy/unidad-reguladora-control-datos-personales/comunicacion/publicaciones/resoluciones-
dictamenes-informes-2019/resoluciones-dictamenes-informes.
2595
          Opinion       11/019,       available      at:      https://www.gub.uy/unidad-reguladora-control-datos-
personales/comunicacion/publicaciones/resoluciones-dictamenes-informes-2019/dictamenes/dictamen-11019-24.
2596
     Article 1 of Law No. 18.446, available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes/18446-2008. In addition to
the INDDHH, the Human Rights Secretariat was set up under the Presidency of the Republic in accordance with
the provisions of Articles 67 to 69 of Law No. 19.149 as the body responsible for ensuring a human rights
approach by the Executive in the pursuit of public policies and in relation to society.
2597
     Article 36 and 37 of Law No. 18.446. The members of the Board of Directors are elected for a period of five
years, renewable once (Article 41 of the law) and can only be removed by parliament with the same number of
votes by which they were elected, on specific grounds, set out in Article 52(f) of the law (e.g., for engaging in
conduct that makes him/her unworthy of his/her office, for acting with notorious negligence in the fulfilment of
the obligations and duties of the office, for having committed a serious breach of the duties inherent to the
office).
2598
     Article 4(J) and (F) of Law No. 18.446. The competence of the INDDHH, without prejudice to expressly
established exceptions, extends to all public powers and bodies regardless of their legal nature and function,
whether they act in the national territory or abroad, see Article 5 of Law No. 18.446.
2599
     Article 2 and 51 of Law No. 18.446. The INDDHH has its own budget, which is approved by the Parliament,
see Article 74 and 75 of the law.
2600
     Article 35 of Law No. 18.446. The investigatory powers of the INDDHH set out in Article 35 include the
power to a) carry out, with or without prior notice, inspection visits to any place or sector of activity of the
agencies and entities under its competence, b) interview any authority, request reports, examine files, archives
and any type of document, carry out interrogations or any other reasonable procedure, and c) interview any
person and request the provision of reports or documentation that may be necessary to clarify the matter in which
it intervenes and to carry out all other actions aimed at clarifying the facts. Public authorities and other entities
falling under the competence of the INDDHH may not invoke reasons of secrecy, reserve or confidentiality,
whenever the INDDHH requests information regarding human rights violations or when it is relevant to

                                                        331
Based on the findings of its investigation, the INDDHH may propose 2601 to the competent
authorities the adoption of the measures it deems appropriate to put an end to the human
rights violation it has found and establish the time period within which they must be complied
with, suggesting the reparation measures it deems appropriate 2602. In urgent cases, it may
propose (at any stage of the proceedings) the adoption of interim measures in order to cease
alleged violations of human rights or to prevent harm or further damage. Moreover, in that
case it may also turn to the judiciary in order to request the precautionary measures it deems
appropriate, and to file appeals for “amparo” or “habeas corpus” (see next section) 2603. If the
INDDHH through an investigation becomes aware of potential crimes committed by public
authorities, it must bring it to the attention of the competent courts 2604. The Ombudsman is
required to lay an annual report before Parliament which must contain, inter alia, an account
of the number and types of complaints submitted, those that have been rejected and the reason
for their rejection, as well as those that have been investigated and their outcome2605.
According to the last figures available, the INDDHH handled 617 cases and issued 127
resolutions in 2022 2606.

         2.2.4    Redress

The Uruguayan system offers different (judicial) avenues to obtain redress, including
compensation for damages.

First, individuals have a right to obtain access to and rectification or deletion of their data held
by public authorities.

Article 14 LPDP provides that any data subject has the right to obtain all information about
him- or herself held in public or private databases 2607. In addition, Article 15 LPDP stipulates
that, subject to certain conditions, any natural or legal person shall have the right to request


investigate, prevent or avoid human rights violations, see Article 72 of the law. In case of non-cooperation of the
respective authority with the investigation, Article 23 of the law provides that the INDDHH may ‘name and
shame’ the authorities and other officials who have adopted such an attitude (i.a. by mentioning their non-
compliance in its annual report).
2601
     Resolutions of the INDDHH have the character of (non-binding) recommendations, see Article 3 of Law No.
18.466.
2602
     Article 25 of Law No. 18.446. In addition, it may also make general recommendations to eliminate or
prevent situations that are the same or similar to those that motivated the complaint, see Article 26 of the law. In
case the respective authority does not accept or implement in a timely manner the recommendation or proposal
made by the INDDHH, Article 28 of the law allows the INDDHH to ‘name and shame’ the authorities and other
officials who have adopted such an attitude (i.a. by expressly mentioning their names and positions in its annual
report).
2603
     Article 24 of Law No. 18.466.
2604
     Article 30 of Law No. 18.466.
2605
     Article 68 and 69 of Law No. 18.466.
2606
     See the INDDHH’s 2022 Annual Report, available at: https://www.gub.uy/institucion-nacional-derechos-
humanos-uruguay/comunicacion/publicaciones/informe-anual-asamblea-general-2022-0. For a case that
concerned the collection of personal data by criminal law enforcement authorities, see for example Resolution
N° 729/019 with recommendations to the Minister of Interior, available at the following link:
https://www.gub.uy/institucion-nacional-derechos-humanos-uruguay/institucional/informacion-
gestion/resoluciones/resolucion-n-729019-recomendaciones-ministerio-del.
2607
     The information must be comprehensive and cover the entire record pertaining to the data subject, even if the
request only covers one aspect of the personal data. In no case may the report disclose data belonging to third
parties, even if they are linked to the data subject. The information must be provided in a clear form, free of
codifications and, where appropriate, accompanied by an explanation of the terms used, in language accessible to
an average member of the population.

                                                       332
the rectification, updating, inclusion or erasure of personal data relating to him/her included in
a database 2608. Both the right of access and the right to rectification or deletion may be
exercised free of charge 2609. The relevant public authority may only refuse requests based on
the right of access and the right to rectification and deletion to the extent necessary for the
purpose of safeguarding certain important public interest (i.e., the defence of the State or
public security, the protection of the rights and freedoms of third parties or the needs of
investigations being carried out) 2610. These exemptions are not absolute but require the
relevant authority to decide on a case-by-case basis whether to invoke them, after balancing
the relevant interests at stake, including the privacy interests of the individual concerned2611.
In addition, Article 26 LPDP gives individuals the right to ask the URCDP to check the
decision of the relevant public authority when access, rectification or deletion requests are
rejected. The URCDP must then determine whether the decision was appropriate (or not) in
view of the documents and justification provided by the authority. As will be explained in
more detail below, individuals whose requests have been denied also have the possibility to
pursue the special judicial remedy of ‘habeas data’ to gain access to their data or to have that
data rectified or deleted 2612.

Second, any individual may lodge a complaint with the URCDP concerning processing
activities carried out by criminal law enforcement authorities. As described in section 2.2.3, if
the URCDP finds a violation of the LPDP, it provides the relevant public authority with a
decision stating that the facts investigated constitute an infraction, who is responsible for the
infraction and the administrative sanction to be applied. Decisions of the URCDP may be
challenged before the Court of Administrative Litigation in accordance with Decree Law No.
15.524 2613. The court may declare the decision void, in which case the URCDP will have to
take a new decision, taking the judgement of the court into account 2614.

Third, judicial redress is available to all data subjects through the habeas data action or the
writ of amparo.


2608
     The deletion or suppression of personal data may be carried out in the following cases: a) damage to the
rights and legitimate interests of third parties, b) obvious error and c) contravention of the provisions of a legal
obligation. As explained in section 1.1., the URCDP has established through various decisions a ‘right to be
forgotten’ similar to the one recognised in the EU by extending the rights to deletion and objection and drawing
on the principles of purpose limitation and data accuracy set out in the LPDP.
2609
     Article 14 and 15 LPDP. The right of access may only be exercised free of charge at intervals of six months
unless a legitimate interest has arisen again in accordance with the legal system.
2610
     Article 26 LPDP.
2611
     See for example ruling of the Civil Court No. 2, AAA y otros c/ Google Inc. Estados Unidos y otro, case
number         60/2021,       judgement         of      19       October       2021,       available        at     k:
http://bjn.poderjudicial.gub.uy/BJNPUBLICA/hojaInsumo2.seam?cid=153550. In this case concerning a request
to a search engine, based on Article 15 LPDP, to de-index certain search results, the court considered that “The
decision to be taken must form part of our system of law, taking into account the national and international
provisions analysed above, weighing up the various rights and interests at stake and weighing – ultimately and in
the specific case – whether the protection of the personality rights of the actors infringes the rights to freedom of
information and expression in order to determine whether or not they should be granted the ‘right to be
forgotten’”. See also URCDP Opinion No. 6/017 of 26 July 2017 on the lawfulness of the processing of certain
data published by the Ministry of Interior for security purposes, available at the following link:
https://www.gub.uy/unidad-reguladora-control-datos-personales/institucional/normativa/dictamen-n-6017 .
2612
     Article 14 and 15 LPDP. The ‘habeas data’ remedy is set out in Article 37 LPDP and further.
2613
     Decree Law No. 15.524 of 1 September 1984 (Organic law on the Court of Administrative Litigation),
available at: https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/decretos-ley/15524-1984.
2614
     Article 28 of Decree Law No. 15.524.

                                                        333
Through the habeas data action every person may enforce the right to access any personal data
processed by public or private entities concerning him or her, as well as to receive
information on the purposes of processing. In addition, the individual may seek rectification,
insertion, deletion or review of his or her personal information in cases of error,
misrepresentation, discrimination, data outdated or prohibition to process data 2615. The LPDP
provides the conditions for a habeas data action before courts against actions by public
authorities 2616. Once the deadline for the controller to either provide the information requested
by the data subject, or to correct, delete or update the information, has expired and the
controller has not complied with the request, or if the data subject considers the response
insufficient, s/he may initiate a judicial habeas data procedure 2617.

After having exhausted all available judicial and administrative remedies, individuals can also
file a writ of amparo against any act, omission or deed of the relevant public authority that in
their opinion, injures, restricts, alters or threatens, with manifest illegitimacy, any of their
rights and freedoms expressly or implicitly recognised by the Uruguayan Constitution (which,
as explained in section 1.1., includes the right to protection of personal data) 2618. If the writ is
granted, individuals can obtain an injunction containing a “precise determination of what must
or must not be done” to remedy the violation of the right or freedom at stake 2619.

Fourth, judicial redress is also available via the general civil law actions available against
public authorities, including law enforcement authorities. Based on Article 12 LPDP and the
general regulations of Uruguayan civil law, and in particular of its Civil Code, any interested
party who has suffered damages as a consequence of their personal data being processed may
request the relevant redress. Said redress may include the material damages suffered as well
as moral damages 2620.

Finally, once all national law remedies are exhausted, data subjects may bring their case
before the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights.

2.3 Access and use by Uruguayan public authorities for national security purposes

In Uruguay, the State Strategic Intelligence Secretariat (SIEE) and certain entities carrying out
intelligence and counterintelligence tasks within the ministries of Interior, National Defence,
Foreign Affairs and Economy and Finances may access personal data transferred from the EU
to Uruguay for national security purposes 2621. The SIEE is the highest-ranking intelligence



2615
     Article 37 LPDP.
2616
     Article 14, 15 and 38-45 LPDP.
2617
     Article 14, 15 and 38 LPDP.
2618
      Article 1 and 2 of Law No. 16.011 on the Regulation of the Amparo Writ, available at:
https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes/16011-1988. The writ of amparo cannot be filed against certain acts, e.g.,
judicial acts, whatever their nature and the organ from which they emanate.
2619
     Article 9 of Law No. 16.011.
2620
     Articles 1319 and 1324 Civil Code No. 16603.
2621
     The bodies carrying out intelligence tasks within the ministries of Interior, National Defence, Foreign Affairs
and Economy and Finances are: (1) the Strategic Intelligence Directorate (DIE) of the Ministry of Defense, (2)
the National Directorate of Information and Intelligence (DNII) of the Ministry of Interior, (3) the Directorate for
Public Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, (4) the Directorate of National Customs of the Ministry of
Economy and Finances, (5) the Financial Information and Analysis Unit (UIAF) of the Ministry of Economy and
Finances and (6) the Military Intelligence Units (Army, Navy, Air Force) of the Ministry of Defense.

                                                       334
agency in Uruguay and the head of the so-called National Intelligence System 2622. The SIEE
is tasked – among others 2623 – to “produce strategic intelligence in order to support strategic
decision-making aimed at achieving national objectives” 2624 and to “provide for the
application of intelligence and counter-intelligence measures in order to detect and deal with
threats to the State” 2625. The relevant powers of the SIEE and the other intelligence agencies,
as regulated by the National Intelligence Act and its regulatory decree 2626, are described in the
following sections.

         2.3.1    Legal bases and applicable limitations/safeguards

Based on the National Intelligence Act, the SIEE and the other intelligence agencies may
access personal data transferred to Uruguay as part of different activities, which are subject to
specific limitations and safeguards following from the National Intelligence Act itself, the
LPDP, the Uruguayan Constitution, and case law.

As an exercise of public authority, government access for national security purposes in
Uruguay must be carried out in full respect of the law (legality principle) 2627. In particular,
pursuant to Article 6 of the National Intelligence Act, each intelligence agency must take the
necessary measures to ensure its strict compliance with “the regulations in force on the
management and use of personal data”. As such, based on 25 LPDP, the accessing of personal
data transferred from the EU to Uruguay by the SIEE and other intelligence agencies for
national security purposes may only take place in so far this is necessary for the performance
of their legal duties. In a similar vein, in accordance with Article 5(e) of the National
Intelligence Act, only the necessary information may be collected (principle of balancing).

2622
     The National Intelligence System consists of (1) the SIEE, (2) the entities carrying out intelligence and
counterintelligence tasks within different ministries, and (3) entities which, because of the information they
manage or by means of their technical capacity, can contribute to the purpose of the National Intelligence
System, see Article 9 of the National Intelligence Act. The mission of the different entities making up the
National Intelligence System is “to cooperate and to exchange information in order to produce strategic
intelligence”, see Article 8 of the National Intelligence Act. ‘Strategic intelligence’ is defined in Article 3 of the
Act as “knowledge elaborated at the highest level, necessary for decision making, policy formulation and
elaboration of plans for the achievement of national objectives. It refers to a global view on national and
international political, economic, diplomatic, environmental and military issues”.
2623
     Other tasks of the SIEE include formulating the National Intelligence Plan; designing and executing the
intelligence programmes and budgets included in the National Intelligence Plan; to conduct relations with the
intelligence agencies of other states and to formulate norms and standardised procedures common to all the
bodies of the National Intelligence System. See Article 11 of the National Intelligence Act.
2624
     Article 10 of the National Intelligence Act. In accordance with the National Defense Policy, these goals are
the maintenance of the territorial, maritime, aerospace and cyberspace integrity of the country; the international
integration of the Republic; the protection of the population in emergency situations; the development of the
country and the realisation of human security in all its aspects; the international promotion of democracy; the
protection of the environment; the protection of renewable and non-renewable strategic resources and presence
in Antarctica. See Decree No. 157/022 of 30 May 2022 on the National Intelligence Policy, available at:
https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/decretos-originales/157-2022#ANEXO.
2625
     Article 11 of the National Intelligence Act. In accordance with the National Defense Policy, these threats are
violation of land, maritime, aerospace or cyberspace sovereignty; terrorism, per se or linked to organised crime;
organised crime; cyber-attacks; meteorological phenomena, disasters or catastrophes of natural or man-made
origin, affecting the population, the environment or critical infrastructures; biosecurity incidents; deterioration of
the environment; pandemics and epidemics; democratic instability in the region and regional conflicts. The
National Intelligence Plan contains the intelligence and counter-intelligence measures aimed at detecting and
dealing with the threats defined by the National Defence Policy. See Decree No. 157/022.
2626
     Decree No. 157/022.
2627
     Article 5(d) of the National Intelligence Act. The principle of legality also includes the obligation to avoid
privacy-invasive activities.

                                                        335
Based on Article 20 of the National Intelligence Act, any intelligence agency belonging to the
National Intelligence System may obtain relevant background information, including personal
data, necessary for the fulfilment of the specific operational mission of that intelligence
agency, by carrying out “special procedures that may affect the freedom and privacy of
citizens”. Such special procedures include: (1) surveillance of telephone, computer, radio
communications or correspondence in any of its forms, (2) surveillance of information
systems and networks, (3) electronic listening and tapping, including of audio-visual
communications and (4) interception of any other technological system intended for the
transmission, storage and processing of communications or information 2628. Any intelligence
activity involving the use of these “special procedures that may affect the freedom and
privacy of citizens” may only be carried out when authorised by a judicial warrant 2629.
Moreover, in accordance with the case-law of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights
mentioned in section 2.2.1 with respect to the interception of communications under the CPC
2017, any surveillance measures that interfere with the inviolability of communications are
only allowed insofar these measures are suitable, necessary and proportionate.

The use of the abovementioned powers is also subject to limitations and safeguards that are
specifically designed to prevent their (mis)use, and to ensure the protection of fundamental
rights, including those guaranteed by Article 10, 11 and 72 of the Uruguayan Constitution. In
particular, the National Intelligence Act provides that no intelligence agency may (1) carry
out repressive tasks or perform, on their own, police or criminal investigation functions,
unless such activity is within their specific legal duties or mandated by court order in the
framework of a specific case, (2) intervene in the political, social or economic activity of the
country, in its foreign policy or in the internal life of political parties, or (3) influence in any
way public opinion, individuals, the media, associations or groups of any kind 2630.

Finally, violations of the above-mentioned rules are subject to criminal sanctions, as detailed
in section 2.2.1.

         2.3.2    Further use of the information collected

The LPDP contains specific protections for personal data that is processed by the SIEE and
other bodies that make up the National Intelligence System for national security purposes, as
explained in section 2.1. In addition, the National Intelligence Act imposes specific
limitations on the further sharing of data, including personal data, with other entities inside or
outside Uruguay. When sharing data with each other or with third parties, intelligence
agencies must observe the principle of balancing, requiring that the dissemination of data they
have collected is limited to what is strictly necessary for the fulfilment of their respective


2628
     Article 20 stipulates that “the regulations of this law shall specifically establish the special procedures as
well as the hypotheses in which they may be used”. At the time of the publication of this report, these regulations
had not yet been adopted.
2629
     Article 20 of the National Intelligence Act.
2630
     Article 7 of the National Intelligence Act. The overall aim of the legislative framework to establish clear
boundaries for intelligence activities is also reflected in Chapter IX (‘Acting in accordance with the law’) of
Decree No. 157/022, which specifically provides that “the fulfilment of the intelligence and counterintelligence
function shall be strictly in accordance with the law” and that “the bodies of the [National Intelligence System].
shall apply the necessary diligence in order to guarantee the rights of individuals, in particular personal privacy,
honour and due process”.

                                                       336
tasks 2631. Intelligence agencies are furthermore prohibited from revealing or divulging any
type of information acquired in the exercise of their functions, outside the provisions of the
National Intelligence Act, except in the case of a court order 2632.

         2.3.3    Oversight

The activities of Uruguayan national security authorities are supervised by different bodies.

First, as explained in more detail in sections 2.1 and 2.2.3, the URCDP is competent to
oversee compliance with the LPDP’s rights and principles in the context of processing
activities carried out by national security authorities. This includes overseeing compliance
with the specific safeguards set out in Article 25 LPDP, which notably limits the processing
of personal data by law enforcement and national security authorities to what is “necessary for
the strict compliance with the duties legally assigned to such bodies for national defence,
public security or the suppression of crime” 2633.

Second, as explained in more detail in section 2.2.3, INDDHH carries out independent
oversight over the respect for fundamental rights, recognised by the Constitution of Uruguay
and international law, by public authorities. This includes authorities responsible for
protecting national security 2634.

Third, parliamentary oversight in the area of national security is ensured by the Bicameral
Commission for the Control and Supervision of the National Intelligence System, which has
been active since May 2020. The Commission was created by the National Intelligence Act as
an independent review mechanism composed of members of the two legislative chambers
covering all the parliamentary parties 2635. It is charged with the control and supervision of all
the activities carried out in the context of the National Intelligence System 2636. The
government is obliged to provide the Commission with detailed information concerning the
general activities of the intelligence bodies as well as on events of particular relevance 2637. To
perform its oversight role, the Bicameral Commission may initiate ex officio
investigations 2638. If the investigation leads to the suspicion of a criminal offence, the
Commission may recommend that the case be referred to the competent criminal court for
further investigation 2639.



2631
     Article 5(e) of the National Intelligence Act. Such further sharing by these bodies must take place in
accordance with their respective regulations, the provisions of the SIEE and the Act itself. The provision
furthermore expressly states that “the use of the information of the System for the specific benefit of individuals,
private organisations, political parties or others of any nature and purpose shall contravene this principle, and
such cases shall be subject to the civil, administrative and criminal actions that may be applicable”.
2632
     Article 7(4) of the National Intelligence Act.
2633
     Article 25 LPDP.
2634
     For a case that concerned the collection of personal data by national security authorities, see for example
Resolution N° 729/019 with recommendations to the Minister of Interior, available at the following link:
https://www.gub.uy/institucion-nacional-derechos-humanos-uruguay/institucional/informacion-
gestion/resoluciones/resolucion-n-729019-recomendaciones-ministerio-del.
2635
     Article 25 of the National Intelligence Act. The Bicameral Commission has been established in May 2020.
2636
     Article 26 of the National Intelligence Act.
2637
     Article 26 of the National Intelligence Act.
2638
      Article 12 of Law No. 16.698 of 25 April 1995 on Parliamentary Committees, available at:
https://www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes/16698-1995.
2639
     Article 28 of Law No. 16.698.

                                                       337
The Bicameral Commission has access to all the information or documentation it requests
from the bodies that make up the National Intelligence System. Such access may only be
denied for imperative reasons listed in the law, notably the protection of sources or the
protection of the identity of third parties 2640. The invocation of these exemptions is regarded
as an ultimum remedium; the exemptions must be interpreted restrictively, and their use
strictly limited 2641.

The Bicameral Commission is actively performing its duties. It holds regular meetings to
discuss topics and issues related to the functioning of the National Intelligence System and to
exercise its oversight role. For example, in the past three years the Commission has held
several meetings with the Director of the SIEE, to discuss topics such as the work of the
SIEE, the National Intelligence Policy, the National Intelligence Plan and the SIEE’s annual
report 2642.

         2.3.4    Redress

The Uruguayan system offers different avenues to obtain redress, including compensation for
damages.

First, individuals have a right to obtain access to and rectification or deletion of their data
processed by the SIEE or other bodies that are part of the National Intelligence System, as
described in more detail in sections 2.1 and 2.2.4 2643.

Second, any individual may lodge a complaint with the URCDP concerning processing
activities carried out by national security authorities, as explained in section 2.2.4.

Third, judicial redress may be sought via a habeas data action or writ of amparo against the
SIEE or other bodies that are part of the National Intelligence System, subject to the same
conditions described in section 2.2.4.

Fourth, the same judicial avenues as the ones described in section 2.2.4 are also available
against the SIEE and the other bodies that are part of the National Intelligence System.

Finally, once all national remedies are exhausted, data subjects may bring their case before
the Inter-American Commission of Human Rights.




2640
     Article 26 of the National Intelligence Act.
2641
     Chapter XV of Decree No. 157/022.
2642
      See the website of the Commission, where it publishes abbreviated minutes of its meetings:
https://parlamento.gub.uy/camarasycomisiones/asambleageneral/comisiones/1186/comision-actuacion.
2643
     In accordance with Article 29 of the National Intelligence Act, all information, including background
information, as well as records held by the bodies that make up the National State Intelligence System and their
staff, regardless of their position, shall be considered reserved and restricted for all legal purposes, in accordance
with Article 9 of Law No. 18.381 of 17 October 2008 on access to government information. The information
remains classified for up to 25 years (Article 33 of the Act). However, Article 34 of the Act clearly states that the
confidential character of the classified information held by intelligence services may not be invoked in any case
when it relates to human rights violations, or when it is relevant to prevent or investigate such violations.

                                                        338
