THE ANDORRA HUSTLE — Releasing September 4, 2020



Logline:

In 2015, a private bank was assassinated by Spanish, American, and Andorran governments in
their eﬀorts to destroy the Catalonian Independence Movement.

Synopsis:

Andorra, a tiny, independent country situated between France and Spain in the Pyrenees
mountains with a total population of 80,000 people found itself at the center of one of the most
convoluted and outrageous bank robberies in modern history: on March 10, 2015, Banca
Privada d’Andorra (BPA), a private bank in Andorra, was shut down by Spanish, American, and
Andorran governments in Spain’s eﬀorts to destroy the Catalonian Independence Movement
thus leaving dozens of innocent civilians facing prison for money laundering crimes that never
existed, and scores of innocent families have had their entire life savings stolen from them.

The incentive for the Spanish government to destroy BPA was part of Spain’s ongoing
“Operation Catalonia”—a covert state-sponsored war-like operation to undermine the progress
of Catalonia’s eﬀorts to separate from Spain due to generations of humanitarian and economic
repression Madrid has inflicted upon Catalonia. America’s incentive was to protect Spain’s
interests, as an ally of the United States. Andorra’s incentive appears to be purely economical
on behalf of its leadership.

BPA was targeted due to the assumption that members of the top Catalonian leadership
(President Jordi Pujol, President Artur Mas, and Vice President Oriol Junqueras) had their
money stored at BPA. Spanish Police were of the opinion that destroying the bank accounts of
the Catalonian leadership would help win their war against Catalonia.

A little known fact presented in THE ANDORRA HUSTLE: America’s FinCEN (US Department
of Treasury’s Financial Crimes Enforcement Network) has the power to shut down any bank in
the world with a single press release called a “Section 311” - part of the USA Patriot Act—
without requiring any evidence of wrongdoing, under the guise of “protecting the world’s
financial system”. Spanish Police presented fake evidence of money laundering to America’s
FinCEN, resulting in America issuing a “Section 311” against BPA. In the weeks following, the
American private equity firm J.C. Flowers purchased the newly destroyed BPA at an 86%
discount—precisely verbatim as Spain warned would happen to BPA.

Most mainstream news reporting on the closing of BPA have reported that BPA was shut down
due to money laundering activity concerning the Sinaloa Drug Cartel, the Venezuelan
government, and Russian and Chinese mafias. This documentary examines these money
laundering charges in a forensic fashion, proving that BPA was categorically innocent of these
crimes. THE ANDORRA HUSTLE gives the audience a well-researched narrative that
contradicts all mainstream news coverage of these events.
THE ANDORRA HUSTLE — Releasing September 4, 2020


Eric Merola, Director and Producer:

Eric Merola is an internationally award-winning documentary filmmaker and journalist. During the first
decade of Merola’s career he had investigated various stories within the realm of innovative medical
science. Merola’s first documentary, Burzynski, had been viewed by millions and had garnered numerous
international awards, including the national and city awards for “Best Documentary” at HumanDoc in
Warsaw. Burzynski also won “Best Documentary” on America’s The Documentary Channel, and was
later distributed on Netflix worldwide. Merola’s other films include The God Cells: A Fetal Stem Cell
Journey and Second Opinion: Laetrile at Sloan-Kettering. In 2020, Eric Merola has signed a Hollywood
deal to adapt his previous documentaries into a scripted dramatic series, in collaboration with Ryan
Farley, the Emmy-nominated writer and producer of Netflix’s Ozark.


About the production / director statement:

THE ANDORRA HUSTLE was produced from March, 2019 to August, 2020, with on-location
investigations and filming conducted in Andorra, Spain, Belgium, and the United States.

When director Eric Merola began this investigation he was unaware of the depth of the story and how it
related to Madrid’s covert war with Catalonia. Merola’s original interest was of simple curiosity in how the
US Treasury has the power to eﬀectively close any bank of its choosing, anywhere in the world, by
simply issuing a press release called a “Section 311” — with the intention of “protecting the US financial
system from money laundering and terrorist financing”.

Since the enactment of the USA Patriot Act in 2001, which gave birth to FinCEN’s “Section 311”: 26
banks in the world had a “Section 311” placed against them, including BPA, with 16 of those 26 banks
having their “Section 311” notice “rescinded” or “withdrawn” shortly after, including BPA. All of these
banks were tiny banks with no significant standing whatsoever in the world’s financial system. [Source]

Simultaneously, numerous large powerful banks that had been caught red-handed laundering billions for
various drug cartels and terrorist groups never had a “Section 311” issued against them. These banks
include HSBC (over $1 billion laundered for the Sinaloa Drug cartel, Iran terrorist groups, etc), Danske
bank ($230 billion for Russian criminal groups, Iran, and North Korea); the list goes on and on.

It became apparent that FinCEN’s “Section 311” is being used for everything but “protecting the US
financial system”, and is instead being used as a political weapon—like a drone missile to take out any
bank of its choosing to accomplish certain political goals. The fact that 16 of the 26 banks that were
destroyed by a “Section 311” since 2001 were later withdrawn, implicitly demonstrates that at least 16 of
those 26 banks had no money laundering activity that FinCEN could prove, including BPA. When a
“Section 311” is issued against a bank, all correspondent banks must immediately cut ties with that
bank—resulting in that bank’s inability to operate—thus resulting in its closure.

Once a bank is closed due to a “Section 311”, what happens to all the money in that bank? What
happens to the life saving of families and all the bank accounts of the innocent customers? This entire
process sets the stage for an opportunity to co-opt everyone’s accounts and eﬀectively and legally
commit an old fashioned bank robbery. This has been apparent in the case of BPA.
THE ANDORRA HUSTLE — Releasing September 4, 2020


Since the US Treasury’s withdrawal of its “Section 311” against BPA was the fastest in its history, and
since the owners of BPA were working with American attorneys taking FinCEN to court in the United
States requesting the US Treasury provide proof of money laundering at BPA, and since BPA was the
only “on shore” bank in Andorra—the more this story unraveled, the more intriguing it became.

Then, once Merola dug deeper and discovered that this entire event occurred because of Spain’s war
with Catalonia, and found an audio recording of the head of Spanish police threatening BPA in Andorra
with precisely verbatim what occurred if BPA didn’t hand over the bank accounts of the Catalonian
leadership to Spanish police—providing smoking gun evidence of the intentions of the entire “Section
311”… Merola concluded, “this needs to be a documentary!”

                                                    —

Written, directed, and produced by: Eric Merola
Director of Photography: Kate Merola, Eric Merola, Rebecca Parkin, Harold Moss
Music: Peter Venne, Maxime Carpentier (Studio Viking)
Produced by: Eric Merola, Kate Merola
Edited by: Eric Merola
Motion graphics: Eric Merola
Spanish translation assistance: Xiomara Garcia
Catalan translation: Kathryn Boyd
English narration: Eric Merola
Spanish and Catalan narration: Jordi Boixaderas
JC Flowers animation “Que Viene el CoCo”: Little Mamut; animation: Pere Roca; artists: Pere Roca,
                                           Alex Martinez; music: Envato Elements

                                                    —

Interviewees in order of appearance:

Isabel Sarmiento: Former Head of Compliance, BPA
Joan Cejudo: Former Deputy General Manager of Corporate Operations, BPA
Santi Rosselló: Former Director of International Operations, BPA
Josep Antoni Silvestre: Attorney, Silvestre Advocats
Gonzalo Boye: Human Rights Attorney, Partner: ECCHR
Artus Mas: Former President of Catalonia
Carles Puigdemont: Former President of Catalonia
Pablo Laplana: Former Deputy General Director International Business, BPA
Miguel Sebastia: Former Executive Director of the Board of Spain-USA Chamber of Commerce
Ares Rosselló: Santi Rosselló’s daughter
Jaume Reixach: Journalist: El Triangle, La Valira
Eric Lewis: Attorney, Lewis, Baach, Kaufmann, Middlemiss
Carles Quílez: Journalist: Global Chronicle, El Taquígrafo
Ana Sole: Attorney, S&M Advocats
Gema Martinez: Attorney, S&M Advocats
