 
 Protection of personal data | Pal Arinsal 
 Skip to main content
 Info and booking 
 +376 891 815 
 Show available languages 
 en
 Language 
 Español Català Français English 
 Webcams 
 My GrandSki 
 Menu 
 Start purchase 
 Live 
 6 C° min / 19 C° max 
 Pal Arinsal 
 Webcams 
 The weather 
 Min. 
 6 ºC 
 Max. 
 19 ºC 
 Sunny 
 Access 
 Pal road 
 opened 
 Arinsal road 
 opened 
 Map 
 Open lifts 
 0 / 5
 0 / 5
 Bike Park circuits 
 0 / 32
 0 / 32
 Summer activities 
 0 / 4
 0 / 4
 Close 
 My basket 
 Close 
 Back 
 Summer
 Winter
 The resort 
 Opening Hours 
 How to Get There and Park 
 Circuits and activities status 
 Webcams 
 Events agenda 
 Contact 
 Bike Park 
 Bike Park 
 Bike World 
 Bike school 
 Open submenu 
 Private lessons 
 Furious by Pal Arinsal 
 Summer camp 
 Bike Park map 
 Bike rental 
 Passes 
 Summer pass 
 Bike Park pass 
 Bike World pass 
 Activities passes 
 Plus Bike pass 
 Season Bike Pass 
 26-27 Ski season pass 
 Experiences 
 Summer activities 
 Trekking routes 
 Offers & Packages 
 Restaurants 
 Lunch at Pal Arinsal 
 Xiringuito de la Caubella 
 The resort 
 Opening and schedule 
 Live slopes 
 Open submenu 
 Slopes report 
 Weather 
 Webcams 
 Resort map 
 How to get there 
 Parking 
 Ski lifts 
 Events agenda 
 Contact 
 Ski Pass 
 Ski Pass 
 Day pass 
 Ski Pass Plus 
 Season pass 
 Open submenu 
 Andorra Pass 
 Nord Pass 
 Mountain Pass 
 Extracurricular ski pass 
 Ikon Pass 
 Schools and lessons 
 Winter schools 
 Lessons for kids 
 Adaptive skiing 
 Experiences 
 Winter activities 
 Open submenu 
 First snow 
 Snowshoes 
 Big Zip Zipline 
 Activity Pack 
 Ski mountaineering 
 Winter Bike Park 
 Ski circuits for kids 
 Restaurants 
 Lunch at Pal Arinsal 
 Starry dinners 
 Other services 
 Services 
 Aprés-ski 
 Click & Collect 
 Ski storage 
 Ski rental 
 Merchandising 
 Deals & Packages 
 All ski offers 
 Skiing in December 
 Hide messages 
 Show message 
 Home 
 Protection of Personal Data 
 Protection of personal data
 Protection of personal data RGPDUES 2016/679 - LQPD 29/2021 Legal texts version 1.1 
 Legal texts version 1.1 08-2022 (Additional information) 
 3.0 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION (GENERAL) PROTECTION OF PERSONAL DATA GDPR (UE) 2016/679 – LQPD 29/2021 (Additional information) RESPONSABLE: Identification of the Person in charge of treatment. NEUS DEL VALIRA, S.A. -NEVASA- Av. Carlemany, 68 Despatx 401 Edifici Illa Carlemany  AD700 ESCALDES-ENGORDANY (Principat d’Andorra) NRT A706067F +376 891 818 Contacte del DPD: dpd@grandvaliraresorts.com   UE REPRESENTATIVE: Identification and contact of the UE Representative: Mallafrè Consultors, SL.U. e-mail: representant.ue@mallafre-consultors.cat   PURPOSES: Description of the treatment: In accordance with the “principle of limitation of purpose”, the data collected will be processed exclusively for specific, explicit and legitimate purposes and will not be further processed in a manner incompatible with said purposes. Conservation time: The personal data provided will be kept as long as the commercial relationship is maintained as long as you do not request its deletion. We inform you that in accordance with the legal provision, we are obliged to keep them for tax and accounting reasons, and to make them available to a competent public entity that so requests. Automated decisions: We inform you of the existence of automated decisions, including the creation of profiles in order to improve your user experience and provide you with information, services or products appropriate to your preferences.   LEGITIMATION: Legal basis of treatment: The legal bases for the treatment of your data are legitimized in the collection of the same, stating if it is a legal, contractual, public interest, legitimate interest or your explicit consent requirement.   RECIPIENTS: Recipient of the assignment: The data collected will be communicated to the companies listed below, for specific purposes, in compliance with strict compliance with internal data protection regulations: SAETDE, S.A.  C/ Prat de la Creu 59, 5 Pis Esc. B AD500 ANDORRA LA VELLA (Principat d’Andorra)  NRT A700071W e-mail dpd.saetde@grandvalira.com ENSISA, S.A.  Pàrquing del Tarter s/n, Edifici Obac AD100 EL TARTER-CANILLO (Principat d’Andorra)  NRT A700159E e-mail dpd@soldeu.ad   SOCIETAT EXPLOTADORA DEL CAMP DE NEU ORDINO ARCALÍS, SOCIETAT ANÒNIMA (SECNOA, SA) Edf. l'Hortell - Arcalís AD300 ORDINO (Principat d’Andorra) NRT A075524C +376 739 600 E-mail dpd@ordinoarcalis.com SETAP 365, SA EDIFICI DE SERVEIS D'ENSISA EL TARTER AD100 CANILLO - (Principat d'Andorra) NRT: A-716174-A Telèfon: +376 890500 ESTACIONS DE MUNTANYA ARINSAL/PAL, S.A.U. (EMAP) EDIFICI EL PLANELL PAL / LA MASSANA - (Principat d'Andorra) E-mail DPD: dpo_pa@palarinsal.com International data transfers: Yes, they occur, and they provide all the appropriate guarantees assumed by the data controller or processor established in one of more third countries as provided by the art. 46 of the GDPR (UE) 2016/679 and by the art.44 of the LQPD 29/2021 Treatment processors: The data may be transferred to Data Processors with access to data, with whom the obligations and responsibilities required by the GDPR (UE) 2016/679 and by the LQPD 29/2021 are formalized and who offer sufficient guarantees.   RIGHTS:  Exercise of rights: The interested party may exercise the rights that assist him, in accordance with the RGPDUE 2016/679 and the LQPD 29/2021 and which are: ·         Right to request access to personal data regarding the interested party. ·         Right to request its rectification or deletion. ·         Right to request the limitation of your treatment. ·         Right to object to the treatment. ·         Right to the portability of your data. The interested party may exercise these rights by submitting a letter to the address of the data controller or by sending a statement to the email dpd@grandvaliraresorts.com accompanied by an identification document. In the event that the interested party acts through a legal representative, he must provide the identification document and the proof of his legal representation. In the case of considering your right to the protection of violated personal data and want to know more information about this right and how to exercise it, you can contact the APDA: http://www.apda.ad/ Tel. (+376) 808 115 Edifici del Consell General C/ Doctor Vilanova, 15-17 (planta 5) AD500 Andorra la Vella (Principat d’Andorra).   
 On
 Our partners 
 Andorra.png 
 Grandvalira 
 Andorra Turisme 
 La Massana blanc horitzontal.png 
 Grandvalira 
 Comú de la Massana 
 Creand_letras-blancas_Eventos.png 
 Grandvalira 
 Creand 
 Estrella-Damm.png 
 Grandvalira 
 Estrella-Damm- 
 Commencal.png 
 Grandvalira 
 Commençal blanc 
 View all partners 
 Receive the latest updates 
 and stay connected with Pal Arinsal 
 Register now 
 Connect and share 
 Facebook 
 X 
 Instagram 
 Youtube 
 LinkedIn 
 Download the App 
 Just the most important thing in your pocket right now 
 Menú del peu - palarinsal.com 
 Contact 
 Request for information, suggestions, incidents, travel budgets... 
 Help 
 Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) 
 Discover 
 Blog 
 News 
 Andorra, cycling territory 
 Environment and sustainability 
 Additional information RGPDUE 
 Internal rules 
 Work with us 
 Ethical Channel 
 We are Pal Arinsal 
 Who we are 
 Grandvalira Resorts 
 © 2026 Grandvalira Resorts. All rights reserved 
 Menú inferior - palarinsal.com 
 Cookie policy 
 Legal note 
 Start purchase 
 Menu 
 Live 
 My GrandSki 
 My basket 
 My purchase 

